We are not a monogous species. It's a
social construct. And I get attacked for
saying things like this. But sexual
monogamy from an evolution point of view
is not a good idea. That's why we have a
reasonably high rate of people who have
extramarital affairs. So do you think
we're all somewhat pretending to be
monogous? Who do you think struggles
with it more, men or women? And you said
that there's not a difference in
well-being and satisfaction between
polyamory or monogamy. Absolutely not.
How do we know this? Because we've done
studies on it. And I've committed the
last two decades of my life to
understand the neuroscience of love. Dr.
animation is the Oxford trained
evolutionary anthropologist using
science to decode attraction, attachment
styles, love addiction, and now the
crucial roles of the father. So, here's
the thing. When we look for a partner,
we don't know we're doing it, and it
involves two very distinct areas of the
brain. So, there's the unconscious
stage. That's where you take in loads of
sensory information about them. So, for
example, if you're a woman, you can
smell genetic compatibility. Wait, so
men can't smell women, but women can
smell them? You can smell them, but it's
not going to give you any information
about genetic compatibility. So, your
brain is going to help you assess
whether they're any good for you. If you
get a good ping, certain chemicals, the
very core of the brain take away the
fear. It gives you motivation. Now,
human love is so complicated. So, for
example, the chemistry that underpins
love is also involved in
neurodeiversity. So, if I have ADHD or
autism, how am I more likely to struggle
in love? This is really, really
important. First of all,
Dr. Machan, why are you talking about
fatherhood? The way our culture treats
fathers is wrong. The myths we carry
about fathers are wrong. Men have a very
specific role in child development. And
I wasn't expecting to find this when I
first started, but it's fundamental for
a child to thrive and survive and be
successful. So, what we're finding is
this has always blown my mind a little
bit. 53% of you that listen to this show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show. So, could I ask you for a favor
before we start? If you like the show
and you like what we do here and you
want to support us, the free simple way
that you can do just that is by hitting
the subscribe button. And my commitment
to you is if you do that, then I'll do
everything in my power, me and my team,
to make sure that this show is better
for you every single week. We'll listen
to your feedback. We'll find the guests
that you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do. Thank you so
much.
Dr. Anna Machan, what is the the mission
you've so far committed your life to?
And and I guess adding to that, why I've
committed the last two decades of my
life to understanding human love and
understanding human close relationships.
Because as an anthropologist, I
understand that love sits at the center
of what it is to be human. If you strip
everything else away and you just you've
got your food, you've got your water,
the next thing you need are your
relationships, is your love. And we are
so lucky as a species to experience love
in quite a complex way with many
different types of people and beings.
And we know that it's like the number
one thing in terms of your your health,
mental, physical, your longevity, your
happiness, your well-being. And I think
we need to understand it particularly in
a world where we're starting to get a
lot of input in terms of technology and
AI and the world is getting quicker. We
need to go back to who we are really at
our core and what love really is. is and
and I suppose that's what I've I've
given my life over to is to really
explain to people who are you because
your love is your identity essentially.
And you use the word anthropologist
there. What is an anthropologist? Okay.
So an anthropologist is somebody who
studies the human species. I'm an
evolutionary anthropologist which means
I sit at the scientific end of it. You
consider sort of the cultural end or the
scientific end. And I study how
evolution has shaped us and also why
things evolved. So for example, why did
love evolved? Why did fatherhood evolve?
Um, and I use lots and lots of different
techniques, scanning and genetics and
all these different things to be able to
answer that question. I've got another
book sat in front of me here which is I
guess somewhat linked to love which is
about fathers. Yeah. So, how did how did
these two things come together? We've
got a book here about love and then
we've got a book about fatherhood and
you're you're very well known for
talking on the subject of fatherhood.
What what is the link? How did the link
come to be and why why are you talking
about fatherhood? We have the wrong idea
about fathers. The way our culture deals
with fathers, treats fathers is wrong.
The myths we carry about fathers are
wrong. The influence they have on their
children and ultimately on our society
is fundamental. So the link came because
I had a child and like most couples who
have a baby, you know, we talked about
it. We were like, we're going to going
to start trying to have a baby. Then we
became pregnant, which was great. Did
the pregnancy test together. Went to the
antiatal classes, went to the scans, all
wonderful. went in to have the baby and
it didn't turn out how it was supposed
to. I was very, very ill. I lost a lot
of blood. My daughter was poorly when
she was born. And afterwards, I was
offered loads of counseling. Would you
like a debrief? Would you like? And I
was like, well, to be absolutely honest,
I'm okay cuz I passed out. I literally
don't remember anything. But my husband
witnessed it all. And he basically saw a
car crash in slow motion with two people
in it who he loved very deeply. Um, and
I completely understand why it was a
very stressful information. But nobody
explained to him what was happening. And
so they mopped me up, took my baby, took
her to neonatal care and left him in the
room on his own. And I was breathing
very shallowly and he was scared. And
the cleaner came in and said and was
cleaning away. And he just said um to
the cleaner, do you think she's dead?
Cuz I was breathing so shallowly. And
the cleaner went, no, I don't think so,
mate. I think they would have told you
if she was dead. But after that, he
couldn't talk about the birth. He
couldn't imagine the birth. He couldn't
deal with the emotions from the birth
for a good two years afterwards. And he
was really worried about having another
kid. And this made me really angry
actually cuz I was like, hold on, we
went into this together and he's
literally been discarded like he doesn't
matter. And to me, he's fundamentally
important. And then as our daughter
grew, I saw the amazing bond he built
with her, how integral he was to her
life. And so when I went back to
university at Oxford to study and to do
my work, I thought, well, I'm an
anthropologist. Okay, let's look up what
do we know about fathers in our society.
And there's literally nothing. There was
a lot of work on absent fathers. Uh, and
their impact is is fundamental. We know
that. And there was a lot of quite
stereotypical work on young fathers,
teenage fathers. Nothing on the majority
of dads who whether they co-reside or
not stick around. So I started with some
really simple questions. uh what happens
to a man when he becomes a father? Does
he alter biologically, psychologically?
How does he build his bond with his
child? What's the nature of that bond?
Does he have a role in child development
separate to that to mom? Because when I
started 20 years ago, the mantra was
dads didn't undergo any changes. Uh dads
did not have a bond like mom to their
children. It was not as intense and it
certainly wasn't an attachment
relationship, which we all know are
really intense, important relationships.
And as an evolutionary anthropologist, I
was like that that can't be right
because human fatherhood is rare. We are
one of only 5% of mammals that have
investing fathers and we're the only ape
now. For something that rare to evolve,
it has to have had a purpose because it
led to amazing anatomical social
upheavalss. So that's what I began to do
20 years ago. I started asking those
questions. I recruited my first group of
15 firsttime fathers when their partners
were three months pregnant and off we
went. So the question that's front of
mind for me is is what is it upstream
that made us devalue the role of a of a
father? Where did that come from?
Because fathers are somewhat seen as
surplus a requirement I think. Where did
that come from? It's cultural. It's
entirely cultural because there are
cultures in the world who don't think
that and fathers are very very integral.
So in fact one of the most hands-on
fathers in the world is from the aka
tribe in the Congo. They keep physical
contact with their children for 50% of
the day. They carry them around. They
co-sleep. Not the mom. They co-s sleep
with the with the child. They are the
one that that carries the far the child
through the jungle when they're hunting
and gathering. They are the one that
sings to the child, reads stories to the
child. They even and this is the bit
that always gets the headlines. They
even will offer a nipple to soo the
child until the mother is ready to
breastfeed. So, it's cultural. We have
this idea that and it's partly it partly
came very much from the Victorian period
where fathers were seen to be
disciplinarians and and providing the
money and that was the Victorian idea of
being a father. It's also to do with our
with our with our politics in society
for a long time. So women weren't able
to go out to work and that's where we've
remained till very very recently. But
there's no biology behind that. That's
entirely cultural. And I think also it's
very much the case. Yes, women today we
have contraception so we can control our
our production of children. We can earn
our own money. We can protect ourselves.
We can look after ourselves. So actually
in one sense you think well yeah what's
the dad for? because I can do all those
things which historically the father had
to do when women's positions were
different. But and we've sort of carried
on with that and there's become this
mantra of actually then we just we just
don't need them. I mean I've even been
to lectures where they've decided that
the Y chromosome is going to become
obsolete and that we really won't need
dads at all even to conceive children at
some point and which to me sounds
ludicrous and that's where it's come
from and we've embedded that and we
embedded it in our media. So dads were
always bumbling or useless or absent.
you know, Daddy Pig is the ultimate
bumbling, useless father, and we laughed
at it. We think it's funny. Maybe the
way that these these two subjects
initially do sort of dovetail into each
other, is when we think about the state
of love and the role of men and women,
you touched a bit on there when you
talked about how women are earning more
and more, so men are becoming a little
bit more apparently obsolete in what
they can offer to a monogous
relationship. There were some stats that
I was looking at before you arrived, and
I'll read them out to you. The stats say
that only 38% of single women are
actively looking to date versus 61% of
single men. Um, which is a huge gap.
Morgan Stanley projects that 45% of
women aged 25 to 44 will be single by
2030.
Um, in England and Wales, a record
almost 40% of adults have never married.
For women aged 30 to 34, the figure is
now almost 60%.
Which is the lowest ever. Women initiate
roughly 70% of divorces, showing a
greater willingness to exit marriages
that are unsatisfying than men. And
obviously, I think one of the points you
were sort of touching on there is that
women are now much more educated um as
it relates to things like college
degrees compared to men. There's this
bigger picture around relationships and
love that kind of sits in the background
of this and women's rise in
independence, which I think we could all
agree is is always going to be a
positive thing. But downstream from that
is a clear issue in how we form monogous
heterosexual relationships these days.
And also like
you know part of the reason one of many
reasons I wanted to speak to you is I
was I was thinking about my friendship
group and the women that I know and more
I spoke to a friend of mine a couple of
couple of weeks ago and I I said to her
like what like what are your goals and
she said I currently have about 150
plants and I want to get to about 250
plants. I I said to her do you want you
want to get married? You want to have
kids? She went no interest in that. What
I want is I want to get to the point
where I have financial freedom. so I can
buy a house and I want to get over 200
plants. Yeah. And this is it sounds kind
of funny, but it's an increasingly
familiar story that I'm hearing which is
once upon a time the goal would have
been get married, you know, have kids,
build a life together. Now it's more
individualistic.
What's your thoughts here? What is the
state of love at the moment? Well, it's
definitely more individualistic. We've
become a more individualistic society.
So we are looking more at yes what do I
want rather than what what in a way
contributes to community which is what
collectivist societies do women in the
past had to get married you couldn't
have children out of wedlock that was
definitely not acceptable you had to get
married because uh that's where your
financial security was and that's what
you did quite often those marriages
weren't based on love they were based on
very pragmatic decisions about this is
where I need to be so women have been
freed from that they don't have to do
that anymore the other thing to say is
they've realized that romantic love
isn't the only love in the box what we
call their key survival critical
relationship in many cases. So the
relationship that's going to support
them emotionally, physically,
practically, all those sorts of things
are their female friends, their chosen
families and that's who they're turning
to. And that's why we're seeing less and
less women saying that romantic love is
a priority or parental love is a
priority. And in one sense, that's great
because actually it's showing that all
these loves are equal and I can I can
love in that way. And I think that's
wonderful in one sense, but yes, it does
mean that we're turning away from that
idea of long-term cohabiting
companionship. And so when people say to
me, for example, is marriage going to
die? Are we going to end? No, I don't
think it is. We will always, for
example, have a ritualistic marking of a
romantic relationship, whatever sex you
are and whatever sexuality you are, I
think that will always exist. But we're
going through a bit of a sea change.
We're also seeing it in older women,
post-menopausal women, because it's only
really very recently that we've got to a
point where we have a long
post-menopausal lifespan as women.
Usually, you know, 100 years ago, if you
got to 50, which is the age for
menopause, the standard age, you were
lucky if you were still alive. But now
that period of time could be 20, 30, 40,
even 50 years. So I think women post 50
and they there's been a massive uptick
in post50 divorces instigated by women
is they look at their partner and they
think you were a great dad. I selected
you when when that's what I wanted to
do. I wanted to have children. I wanted
to build fun. But I look at you now and
I think but is this the person I want to
do the next phase of my life with
because that's a very different set of
needs. And so we're seeing women
actually looking no do you know what I'm
going to start a fresh? I'm going to do
something different. And it might be
they look for a different relationship
or they might be yeah they decide I'm
not going to have another romantic
relationship. What is the difference
that needs just out of curiosity? I want
to make sure that my partner doesn't
dump me when she hits 50. Okay. The
difference is so when we when we are
younger and we look for a partner for a
romantic relationship we don't know
we're doing it. There are two stages of
attraction in romantic love. There's the
unconscious stage which we share with
all the mammals and then there's the the
conscious stage which is very different.
That involves your neoortex which
looking at this is this big wnup bit on
the outside. Human love is special
because it involves two very distinct
areas of the brain. So this is the
limbic area of your brain. This bit in
the center here, that's your unconscious
brain. That's where your emotions sit,
where nurturing behaviors sit, where
attachment behaviors been. It's very
evolutionarily ancient. It's been around
for millions and millions of years. And
this is where initially attraction
starts. And what you do is you lock eyes
with someone across a crowded room and
you take in loads of sensory information
about them. So you take in visual
information. What do they look like?
What does their body shape tell me about
their value? How are they moving? Do
they look healthy? If you're a woman,
you will give them a good sniff. Um, and
you can smell genetic compatibility.
Wait, so men can can't smell women, but
women can smell them. Well, you can
smell them, but it's not going to give
you any information about genetic
compatibility. So, what what happens is
a woman, the major hystocompatibility
complex, what's that? It underpins your
immune system. It's a complex set of
genes. And bizarrely that set of genes
also underpins your smell, your ability
to smell your olfactory system. Okay?
And in women they can smell how
genetically close a male's MHC is major
hystocompatibility complex. How close it
is to theirs because you don't want too
close because you don't want to breed.
Also you want it distant because then
your child gets a really lovely diverse
immune system because they've got a
diverse set of genes underpinning it. So
you smell them. It's not a conscious
thing. So people say to me, "Oh, but you
know what about after shave? What about
perfumes? Or it's not conscious. You do
not know you're doing it. And one of the
things that will be fed into your limbic
area is the result of that little test.
If you're a woman, what what do they
smell like? How do they know this? Have
they tested this? Okay, we've tested
this in several ways. There was the very
famous t-shirt test which tell people
love. Um where you make a load of men
put on a very plain t-shirt. They're not
allowed to wash. They're not allowed to
use deodorant. Not allowed to do
anything. Wear it for 24 hours. Then we
put it in some ziploc bags and we went
get some poor unsuspecting woman to
sniff them all. And the idea is that the
one she finds most attractive to sniff
is the one which is genetically furthest
away from her. And it does work. It
works. When you genotype her, you can
see that they are different. We don't
have to do that anymore. We have very
sophisticated genotyping technology now.
If you really wanted to, there's a
company in Switzerland that will do it
for you. So you can spit on something,
send it off with your partner, and they
will tell you how close your major
hystocompatibility complexes are. I'm
just wondering why men didn't evolve to
be able to do that. We think it's
probably because the cost to a woman of
getting it wrong and having a baby who
is basically too genetically close is
much greater than it is for a man
because she is basically taking herself
out of that opportunity to to reproduce
for nine months plus the bit after to
look after that child. And so that's a
really long period of time. Whereas a
man, it's not that costly. Okay. So
you've taken in all that information
from the sensors. It's all woring around
in here. And what your brain is actually
doing is your brain has got a very
complicated algorithm which is working
out the biological market value of the
person in front of you. Now the
biological market value is how likely
that person is to be reproductively
successful. Because from an evolutionary
point of view, that's the whole point of
your existence. Whether you want kids or
not, guys, that's the point is you have
to reproduce. Have some lovely, healthy
kids, raise them to maturity so they can
reproduce because we just want your
genes from an evolutionary standpoint.
We're not interested in you as a
personality. And so you want somebody
who has got the highest likelihood of
being good at that. And we can tell that
from lots of things to do with how
someone looks, the pitch of their voice,
how they smell. What men actually do is
they look at the waist hip ratio. You
don't know you're doing it, but
eyetracking experiments show that men do
it. They don't know that it's completely
unconscious. Wonderful studies been done
with people walking down the street with
we not mentioning to them what we're
looking for. They're wearing eyetracking
uh technology and what they do is the
first thing they glance at even if they
don't know it is the waist tip ratio
before. For example, they will look at
the face and what they're calculating is
what that ratio is because we know
cross-culturally the most attractive
ratio is a 7. And that is actually a
classic hourglass
cross-culturally. Cross-culturally if we
go and it's nothing to do with weight
because some cultures like bigger
weights than other cultures. Nothing to
do with weight. It's to do with the
ratio. And so if we were show if we show
that ratio to different cultures, they
will go it's that one. And the reason
for that is there is a direct link
between that ratio and for example
fertility. So if a woman has that it
shows she's got high circulating
estrogen. It shows she's not near
menopause because when we go to
menopause we we get more of a male
figure. It goes towards one the ratio
because of the drop in estrogen and the
and the buildup in testosterone. So we
know that there's a link between 7 and a
range of illnesses uh chronic illnesses
such as diabetes, heart disease, certain
forms of cancer. So actually what you're
assessing there is how healthy how
fertile is this woman? So, if I take
myself off the market for a period of
time, am I going to end up with some
kids? And is she healthy to raise them?
In those eyetracking studies, what do
women look at? Women look at slightly
different things. And for women, what's
really interesting is it's not as
visual. So, women look at the at the
shoulder waist ratio. So, that's Yes,
there we go. And what you're looking for
as a woman is a triangle. So, nice broad
shoulders, narrow waist. Okay. Okay. Now
the ideal there is 1.6.
What I will say before men rush off and
measure their weight is really only
Olympic athletes have 1.6. 1.6 meaning
the top half should be 1.6 bigger than
than your waist. Okay. So if my waist is
let's say 100. Yes. That's how bad my
math is. Yes. This needs to be 160. 160.
Okay. So my waist is 100. The top is
160. Yes. Okay. Okay. But that's
actually really only Olympic athletes.
Please everyone don't rush off and
worry. Um but what that's showing is
that shows certain things which are
desirable in a male. Um so things like
physical strength. So if you have a big
upper body and a narrow waist, first of
all, it shows you're not holding fat
around here, which is a real sign of ill
health for men. It shows you that you're
very fit around here. It shows that
you've got very broad shoulders. You are
muscular. You are able to to protect and
provide. It's a sign of reasonably high
testosterone. Testosterone is linked to
success in men. Okay? So it shows that
I'm I'm a successful person in our
society that's successful socially and
successful financially. Testosterone is
linked to success in men. Yes. Yes.
Because it makes you very competitive.
Okay. So we get all these things. You
take all that in. You take in that
visual information. You do your little
algorithm in your brain which obviously
you don't know is happening. If you get
a good ping as in yes this person has a
good biological market value. I like
that. What happens is in the very core
of the brain in the middle. So this is
this is the very core of the brain here.
There's a a structure in there called
the nucleus cumbent. It's full of
dopamine and oxytocin receptors that
fires off, goes completely mad if we
look at it on the screen. And dopamine
and oxytocin flood that system. And the
reason why they are important is in a
way they are the hormones of attraction.
So oxytocin lowers your inhibitions to
starting new relationships. Okay? So it
takes away the fear. And the way it does
that is it quietens your amydala. So the
amigdula is a tiny little structure down
here at the bottom and it it's where
fear sits and that's the thing that if
you're not feeling confident has that
monologue in the back of your head going
okay you're just you're just not very
good at this. You're going to walk
across the bar. You're going to say
hello and they're going to humiliate
you. So it quietens that area. We see
less activity there. So you've got more
confidence. Also oxtoin makes you feel
quite chilled. It's quite nice. And then
dopamine is also released because
dopamine is your hormone of motivation.
And if you just had oxytocin, you might
be so chilled, you sat on the barcel and
you did not move because you're having a
lovely time. So dopamine is there to go,
no, you actually have to go across the
bar and you have to say hello. And so
they work really, really well together.
And they also work together to make your
brain more plastic. So I have to ask you
then, if I'm a single person, yes, and
with what you've just told me about the
brain, I'm trying to increase the
probability that someone will be
attracted to me and form a relationship
to me. M what kind of behavior do I need
to be embodying to cuz I want to I want
to reduce the fear part of their brain
so that they're they're more comfortable
and I want that oxytocin and dopamine to
be firing. Yes, absolutely. So quite
often people say to me how can I hack my
first date? So the way you can hack your
first date is you can do an activity
which releases betaendorphine and
dopamine and oxytocin. The best one I
have found which I I appreciate is a
niche interest is some form of dancing
in couples. ballroom dancing, you know,
tango, whatever it is, because first of
all, you're touching. So, you get
released oxytocin and betaendorphine.
They're both released by touch. You're
moving around. As any gym bunny knows,
exercise produces betaendorphine.
Hopefully, you're not that great at
this. So, you're going to laugh a lot
because you're actually a little bit
rubbish. Okay? So, you're releasing lots
and lots of lovely oxytocin dopamine and
betendorphine doing that. Then
afterwards, you need to go and have a
curry. Okay? Because betaendorphine
evolved initially as your body's
painkiller. That's stellar role it has.
Over time it's been co-opted into our
social uh sphere. But we know you have
pain receptors in your gut. So if you
have a curry, your gut gets a little bit
irritated because it's a little bit
spicy. So don't have a coma. And it
produces
and and we know that that will also help
you help you feel more euphoric, help
you feel more relaxed and help that
person be more attracted to you because
they will also get a hit of it. So that
that's your ideal date. I appreciate
it's very niche and not everyone will
want to do that, but there are ways and
then I'm going to take her to the comedy
store. Yeah. And have a really good
belly laugh. A proper laugh produces
beta endorphin. Okay. Yeah. Had we
finished with the Well, so what you're
doing, your biological market value
comes out. As I say, you hit dopamine
oxytocin. Your amydala quietens. You
feel much more confident. You feel much
more chilled. Dopamine motivates you to
walk across the bar and off you go and
you strike up conversation. And that is
the way attraction works in all mammals.
It's completely unconscious. So you
don't know any of this is happening.
What's different in humans is very
quickly after that, particularly once
they've opened their mouth, it all
starts kicking off in the outer area of
the brain. So your neoortex. So the
major social area of the brain is here.
This is your prefrontal cortex. And your
prefrontal cortex is where all those
social uh abilities sit, you know. So um
trust uh reciprocity ability to maintain
ability to abstract about your
relationship or ability to daydream
about what it's going to be and that's
where all that sits. So we start seeing
firing off here and what's really what's
really important for human love is there
is a connection between this area of the
brain which is known as the striatum
which is unconscious and this area of
the brain the prefrontal cortex. So your
unconscious brain and your conscious
brain can work together in attraction
and also this area of the brain at the
back which is known as the mentalizing
empathizing area of the brain. So we
need to have empathy in relationships.
It's the basis of love. So understanding
someone's emotional state and being able
to respond to it appropriately and also
mentalizing. So mentalizing is mind
readading. What's their intention? What
are they going to do next? You need it
for conversation. You also need it to
spot a cheat
because you need to check someone's
intention. So the mentalizing area of
the brain is important. The sad bit and
I'll explain this in a minute is is
unfortunately that bit shuts down a
little bit which isn't very helpful but
we'll talk about that. So then as soon
as they open their mouth you start to
contemplate them consciously and what
you contemplate consciously in terms of
your attraction can actually override
the unconscious bit. So you might have
had this amazing feeling of, you know,
lust and chemistry as you walk across
the bar thinking, "Wow, this person's
amazing. I'm feeling astonishing." They
open their mouth and they say something
to you which is just, you know,
unconscionable or awful or they've got
no sense of humor or they're really
unkind or whatever it might be and
suddenly that bit will step in and go,
"Uh-uh, nope, this person is not for
me." And that can override the biology.
But that's why what we say and I always
say the brain is the sexiest organ in
the body because ultimately it's what
you express with your brain that is
going to really determine whether or not
this love is going to go anywhere. And
that's what you say. Because ultimately
as humans the thing that makes us the
most successful species on the planet is
our brain. Not your shoulder waist
ratio, not your waist hip ratio. It's
actually your brain. Because you want
your kid to have the most creative,
flexible, funny, intelligent,
emotionally intelligent brain they can
have. And that's what you're looking for
in a partner in the long term. So based
on what you know about attraction and
falling in love and all those things,
what is like the worst thing one could
say in terms of the themes, the types of
things someone could say that would just
completely put you off. So I think
probably the absolutely worst thing you
can say and this comes from a lot of
data saying what's the most important is
to say something unkind.
So we know regardless of everything
else, the one thing that people want in
a long-term relationship is somebody
kind.
So something critical of somebody else
in the room, particularly something crit
I mean, you don't know what that
person's interests are, but something
critical about something that's very
important to them. Don't be alarmed. The
waiter, waitress. Yeah. Exactly. That's
why how people treat I mean, personally,
I find people who treat waiters
enraging, you know, badly enraging. Um,
that's why because it's a rare
representation of who you are at your
core or they express a value which goes
completely against a value that you have
because we know in terms of long
long-term compatibility, it's things to
do with personality, it's things to do
with long-term values or beliefs that
are the most important things. So, let's
say somebody said something horrendously
homophobic or something like that or
something racist, that's an immediate
right. No, this person is not for me.
What about Ix? Because I see seem to
have emerged as like a it's so it's got
a friend of mine who's she's never been
in a relationship. She's um she's just
37 years old, 38 years old. And I
remember one day she was like, "Steve,
what am I doing wrong?" And I'm not
listen I was never really a dater. So I
have no right to to tell someone what
they're doing right or wrong. But she
showed me her dating profile. And in a
dating profile she said to me, I said no
to this guy and I looked at this guy
he's like a he's like a stud.
He's beautifully good-looking. was
really really kind in the messages he
had sent. She goes, "But if you look in
the background of his photo, there's
boxes on top of his wardrobe." And she
was like, "So I said no." Right now,
from an evolutionary perspective, you
can go, "Okay, maybe he's living at his
mom's house. Maybe he's just moved in.
Maybe what? Whatever. Maybe he's not a
settled person." But really, there is
become a culture of women and men
excluding each other based on extremely
surface level things. Now I'm like, does
that is that the preffrontal cortex
doing its job or is that something else?
It is the prefrontal cortex doing its
job. I would say it's not doing its job
terribly well. The ick is a really
recent thing that was generated by
social media. And this idea of narrowing
in closer and closer and closer and what
people like to call red flags and you
don't get a lot of information from
online dating because you don't get a
lot of sensory information to help you
make a decision. So people become more
and more obsessive. What's in the image?
What's in the image? What can I get
about this person? And they start to
become obsessed with tiny tiny things.
What ultimately people find attractive
is very very complicated. It's there are
so many different things that feed into
attraction. Whether or not somebody has
boxes on top of their wardrobe is very
unlikely to be even vaguely important in
terms of compatibility. I don't think
they should be called dating apps. I
think they should be called introduction
apps. And that's actually what the great
Helen Fcher said. She said they're
introduction apps. They broaden your
pool. They make more people available to
you. That's it. You're not having a date
on that app. You're not learning about
that person on that app. You're
literally seeing them for the first
time. And as soon as you can get in the
room with them and you can let your
brain do what it's really good at, half
a million years of evolution, that's
what you should do because they handicap
your brain. They give you very little
information to go into that algorithm.
You said something really interesting
there which kind of dubtales into what I
was saying about my friend who's never
dated but is struggling in dating. I
know a growing number of people that are
going on like a hundred dates a year and
having no luck. And just like
mathematically I go surely there must
have been someone suitable in that pool
of 100 people a year that you've met.
Yeah. What is going on here? It's two
things I think. First of all, as I've
said, it's the low cost of dating apps.
So in the old days when I was dating,
going on a date was a real investment of
time and energy. So you would probably
meet someone at work, you'd meet someone
at a bar, you'd meet someone through a
friend, which was a real blind date. And
you'd, you know, spend your time
thinking, what am I going to wear? and
I've got to go somewhere with this
person and spend some time with this
person, probably some financial
investment as well, get myself all
ready, spend an evening with them. And
that was how you were going to meet
somebody. So, you invested time and you
weren't going to do that unless you were
serious, to be honest. Because
otherwise, I'll stay at home. I'll do
something else. I'll go to the pub with
my friends. Whereas now, because we can
do it, we can literally go on a dating
app anywhere on the tube, while we're
cooking dinner, while we're watching
Netflix, anytime we want. It's low cost,
low investment. I read a study that
showed it was in a different context,
but it essentially showed that the
amount you invest in something
correlates to the amount that you
appreciate the thing. Absolutely. They
did this study where they let people
into a boring um forum without having to
pass any entry test and then they asked
them how much they appreciated the
boring forum and people said it's it's
uh it's boring. Yes. And then they got
another group of people, they made them
go through this sort of rigorous test to
get into this boring forum and then they
asked them how much do you appreciate
the forum. They said it's great. Yeah.
I'm obviously paraphrasing there, but it
just showed this link between the amount
you invest in a process is the more you
you appreciate it. And I think back to
being I don't know 14 years old going on
my first date and the the whole process
of getting ready to go to the cinema and
thinking about my outfit for 3 days and
then going there and being nervous and I
didn't have much money so this was like
a big thing and then how much you know I
almost felt like I fell in love with the
person irrespective just because of the
effort I'd put in I feel like I fell in
love with them. So So yeah. So that's so
so it's partly the low cost thing. It's
partly because all those people that
if you were doing it in person, your
brain would filter out. Let's say there
were 100 people in the room, your brain
would quite quickly filter out most of
them as no no no no no no maybe one or
two might because you can't filter in
that way on an app. You kind of take the
punt on all these dates because you're
like otherwise how else am I going to
actually meet this person? you can't
just have a casual chat by the coffee
machine at work or you know meet them
through some friends in the pub where
you would do that assessment without
really making that much effort whereas
because on a dating app the only way you
can meet that person is to actually go
on a date with them and do all that you
will end up going on a hundred to do
that filtering process. So it's partly
that as well and the last thing is the
paradox of choice. Yeah. So, we are
really, really bad at making choices
when there's a lot of options. And the
paradox of choice is very powerful in
relation to dating apps because
literally, particularly if you're
good-looking and you get a lot of
matches, there's like a smorggas board
of people out there that you can carry
on flipping or you can make a choice.
And it's our brains are not set up for
that. You know, a 100 years ago when we
were trying to find a partner, you would
maybe have the people in your village
who you grew up with to choose from. If
you had a horse, you could maybe have
the people in the next village or even a
town. Wow. And that was who you chose
from and it was a very small pool. Now
you can go anywhere in the world, turn
on your dating app and possibly have,
you know, hundreds of people to meet and
your brain can't do that. I mean, we can
all think about it as well in the
context of restaurants. If you go to
Thailand, Yeah. they give you like a a
catalog. Yes. The menu is a catalog.
They're like, "We will make anything."
Yeah. And you sit there for like Yeah.
45 minutes thinking, "Do I want fish,
chicken, eggs?" But then you go to like
a London fancy restaurant and there's
like we do this. This is it. So that's
why you end up with people who Yes. go
on 100 dates and don't actually
end up with anybody because they haven't
had that opportunity to filter. Monogamy
and polyamory. Yes. So can you define
both of those words? And um the thing
that I found really striking is I think
I heard you say that satisfaction in
either dynamic there polyamory or
monogamy is roughly the same because I
thought people in monogous relationships
were supposed to be way more happy than
people that are in polyamorous
relationships. No, not at all. So
monogamy is a relationship state where
there are two people who are
we okay we have to find two sorts of
monogamy. There's sexual monogamy that
is you are exclusive to that other
person sexually. You have sex with
nobody else and there is social monogamy
and that is you live with that person
exclusively. So within the UK, most
people, let's say if they have children,
are socially monogous. They live in a
household with their children with two
people in it. Whereas sexual monogamy,
you can be socially monogous and not
sexually monogous. So they're two
different things. But monogamy, if we
talk about it in sort of lay terms, is
two people who are exclusive to each
other in terms of love, in terms of sex,
and in terms of possibly living
together. Monogamy itself is a social
construct mostly. We are not a monogous
species. There are in fact very few
monogous species in the world. Maybe I
think I read a book the other day. It
says something like 0.002%
of the animals on this planet are
monogous because what you will see in
the wild and what you see mostly with
humans is social monogamy. They live
together but we know that the infidelity
rate is sits generally at around 50%. So
50% of those households are not sexually
monogous. Um and in fact from an
evolutionary point of view being
sexually monogous is a really quite bad
idea because um you are limiting
yourself to a very narrow gene pool and
that's why there are very few creatures
in the world that are truly sexually
monogous. I when I was doing my masters
my professor studied gibbons. Gibbons at
the time were known to be the monogous
ape and he studied he did a really
longitudinal study and he was the first
to realize that no they weren't. They
were all sneaking off and doing it
behind the rock with somebody else but
they were living together. But the
female was going to find some better
jeans somewhere else. This guy,
brilliant parent, not great jeans. I'm
going to go behind a rock and mate with
this really good-looking gibbon over
here because I'm going to get some good
jeans and then he's going to raise the
kid. And the and the guy is like, well,
you know, I'm obviously going to have
offspring here, but actually, you know,
mating with another female is not
particularly costly to me. So, I'll just
go and do that over there and let's hope
she can raise them on her own or maybe
her partner will raise them for me. So,
there are very few. So we have monogamy
in in mainly in the west um because it's
a socially prescribed
form of organization and it was imposed
because it is a form of control. It
mainly sits in terms of rules
particularly in religion but also there
were many legal rules. For example in in
Britain you can't be you can't have two
marriages. You can't be a bigamist. And
it's about making everybody control.
Because if we if we all just gave in
constantly to precisely what our drives
were saying, there'd be kind of chaos.
And those in power wouldn't be able to
predict what anybody is going to do
because actually I'm just going to go I
feel, you know, sexually attracted to
whoever that is over there. I'm going to
go marry with them, but I'm going to
come back and live here, but then I've
got a kid over there and it's it's all
really really confusing. So over time
when civilization first arose the more
complex we got and as we started to live
together in cities those in control were
like okay I really needed to be able to
predict what these lesser beings are
going to do so I'm going to impose
monogamy you can only live with one
person and basically have sex with one
person nobody actually ever only had sex
with one person but we're going to look
like we do and those are the rules and
that's why we have legitim legitimacy
rules about children and inheritance and
all that kind of thing because it
maintains control. So monogamy is yeah
simply a social construct. It's not
something that we've biologically
evolved to do. And we know that part you
know there are many countries in the
world where monogamy isn't what is
prescribed. How are those cultures
getting on the ones that aren't
monogous? Fine. What what cultures are
those? So you tend to get so so for
example in certain religions. So in
certain forms of Islam for example men
can have many wives. There are certain
um tribes which exist within sort of
South America and in certain areas of
Africa where you can have many wives.
For example, there are some um groups in
Nepal in the Himalayas where we have
what's known as polyandry. So one woman
has many husbands. Um usually the reason
why these different um groupings evolved
like monogamy is it's something to do
with economics generally. So for example
in Nepal in these areas because they
still have um male inheritance of land.
If let's say we've got a family farm and
there's five brothers if all of those
five brothers split the inheritance then
that farm would become uneconomic. You
wouldn't be able to farm it and make
money. So over time what's involved is
one woman will marry all the brothers so
that when they inherit the farm they
will all get it will carry on passing
down essentially. So if it goes against
our evolutionary design to be in
monogous relationships, doesn't that
mean that there's a lot of people who
are
struggling against their Yeah,
absolutely. And that's why we have a a
reasonably high rate of people who have
extrammarital affairs. It's also why
people who are polyamorous or indeed
have open relationships say actually
it's the more truthful way of being
human because all they're doing is
following their drives and they actually
believe that it's more moral because if
you put forward a monogous front and you
have an affair, you are lying to people.
You are keeping a secret from people you
profess to love. Whereas if you're
polyamorous or you're in an open
relationship, you're actually openly
saying this is my drive. This is the
reality and I'm being truthful with
everybody about it. you can enter a
relationship with me or not on the basis
of truth. And that's what a lot of
polyamorous people particularly will
argue is that they're really
representing what is for most people an
ancestral state. Polyory is difficult
because unlike open relationships, open
relationships such as such as swinging
or or being open, we call them
consensual non- monogamy. That's just
based on sex. So you're not spreading
your love relationship, that emotional
investment, that emotional intimacy
amongst more than one person. Polyamory
is uh being open and having several
sexual partners and also having several
emotionally intimate relationships at
the same time. And I think people
struggle more with that because of the
issues of of jealousy um and the fact
that that goes quite strongly against
even our social ideas about monogamy
where we all sort of live in pairs. I've
got a friend of mine that's uh secretly
in an open polyamorous relationship
basically where there's two couples and
they are together. Yeah. So there's four
of them basically. But they they don't
talk about it publicly because of the
judgment. Yeah. And I think maybe part
of the issue is that judgment that
that's for the polyamorous people I I've
interviewed particularly for my book
that was the major thing is that they
were very happy in the relationship. The
relationships were going really really
well. But what was difficult was being
open about it. Particularly with for
example I'm talking to one woman who was
like like older members of the family.
So she was going to a family wedding.
She was and when she went to these
occasions with this family, she could
only ever take one of her partners. It
always had to be the same partner
because they had no idea the other
partner existed because that would be
very difficult for them to take. Also,
we know from studies that have been done
looking at people's attitudes to
polyamorous people. It they are seen as
immoral. They are seen as um unloving.
They're seen as cold because they have
this ability to love lots of many. They
can't truly love anybody because they're
splitting their heart between all these
different people. Polyamorous people
look at it the other way. As I've said,
they actually think it's very moral
because they're being truthful.
Polyamorous relationships tend to be
based on very open communication. That's
one of the rules is that is everybody
still happy? Is everybody still happy
with where the boundaries are? Has
anybody upset anybody else? So, it's
it's very very open. And they also
believe that and in some ways the
support from this, you know, we are able
to to love many friends at once. We're
able to love many children at once. They
say actually they don't split their
their heart. It's not a zero- sum game
that you get 50% and you get 50%.
Actually, that each time they take
somebody into their lives, their heart
just gets bigger. Do you think we're all
somewhat pretending to be monogamous?
I think some people are
happier with monogamy. We know that
partly from a genetic point of view. Um,
so there are some people, no, I don't
think struggle with it, but I do think a
reasonably significant number of people
probably do. Who do you think struggles
with it more, men or women? It really
depends. Do you know something that one
of the major misnomers in love research
is that there is much difference that
there's this major difference between
men and women. There really isn't. There
really isn't. It's more about who you
are at your core. More about attachment
style, personality, your life
experience, your genetics, all these
sorts of things are much more of a
factor in whether or not you will be
comfortable with monogamy or any of
those aspects than whether or not you're
male or female. And again, you said that
there's not not a difference between
well-being and satisfaction levels
versus monogous and polyamorous
relationships. No, absolutely not. How
do we know this? Because we've done
studies on it. We've we've asked we've
done we use the same satisfaction scales
about, you know, um how satisfied are
you in your relationship with various
aspects of that relationship? And they
come out as being absolutely no
different. For what it's worth, babe,
I'm I'm happy with our relationship. I'm
more than happy being monogamous. I I
find it to be a much much easier life.
Well, the only thing polyamorous people
say is you have to have a cracking
Google calendar. Yeah. The time. Yeah.
Yeah. Let's talk about the first
thousand days. So, you really believe
that the first thousand days of a
child's life are the most critical. Yes.
And linked to this is the role of both
the mother and the father. It's long
been assumed that the father is surplus
to requirements that they're not really
that important. as long as they're, you
know, in the stereotypical context. As
long as they're providing for the
family, they don't really need to be
around.
Is that true? And what do we need to
know about how formative those first
thousand days are for a child? Okay,
first of all, no, it's not true. Um, h
it's absolutely fundamental, I think,
for a child to get some input from a
father. I'm going to define father.
In the west, we're a bit obsessed with
the term biological father. And we
always describe that as the real father.
Even if he's not around, even if that
child has been brought up by a
stepfather, an adoptive father, what we
call a social father, which is a
grandfather, an uncle, a best friend, an
older brother. When I say father, people
assume I mean biological father. I
don't. I mean the man or men who have
stepped in and done the job. That is the
father. So I want to make that very
clear. essful. We know that young people
who grow up without that input, the
risks of having negative outcomes uh is
much higher without having a male role
model or some male role models in your
life. We know that they are much more
likely to display antisocial behavior.
They are much more likely to turn to
crime. They are much more likely to have
addiction issues. They are much more
likely to have mental health issues. and
their outcomes in terms of relationships
going through their life with in other
aspects of their lives are much more
negative and there is a reason for that.
So
men have a very specific role in child
development and I wasn't expecting to
find this when I first started but I've
looked at fathering around the world in
many many different cultures and how men
arrive at that role is very different.
Um the the fathering role is much more
diverse than the mothering role. It's
partly because the mother's role is very
tight by biology, by pregnancy, child
birth, etc. Whereas men, we call it a
facultative role. And what that means is
it's much more flexible. It's much more
open to responding to changes in the
environment and adapting to them to help
the family survive. And we see that all
the way around the world. So dads do it
lots of different ways. It really
depends in your environment what the
major risk is. So in our environment,
you know, we don't really have survival
risks in our environment, not to the
extent that they do in some cultures. So
as a dad in in societies where survival
day-to-day survival is a is a problem
whether it's a war zone or whether there
are major major disease issues then a
dad's role there is to keep that kid
alive. If we look at other environments
where survival is reasonably secure but
economic survival is very on edge then
in those environments we tend to see
fathers again not particularly hands-on
in terms of caretaking or nurturing.
they are the um person in that kid's
life who's going to teach them the
skills they need to go forward and be
economically successful. So if you live
in a pastoral uh environment then they
will be taken into the fields and they
will be taught how to do that role and
then they will be taken to the markets
and they will be taught how to negotiate
and build the social networks they need.
And then in our environment where
economics is reasonably secure
comparatively survival is reasonably
secure comparatively then we are social
survival is important in our world. It
really is who you know. But what I found
regardless of how you were doing it was
all fathers have one major major role
and and it's a bit of a technical term
and I'll explain what it is. They
scaffold the child's entry into the
world beyond the family. And what that
means is they are the parent when it
comes to developing the skills, the
neural connections, the biology, the
physiology that enables you to leave
your family and go out into the world
and be successful, to thrive and
survive. And it starts when a baby is
born. So the attachments that a dad and
a mom build to that baby are just as
powerful as each other but they are
different. So a mom's attachment is
based upon nurture. And uh what we tend
to say with a mom and child attachment
is it's quite exclusive. So if you
imagine um a mother her major role with
that child is to nurture and protect.
And so when she's with that child she
will hold that child to her. It's very
inwardlooking. With dads, they do
nurture. Absolutely. They nurture. They
do all that kind of thing. But they use
that nurturing to build confidence in
that child as a secure base, which is
what attachment's about. And what they
actually do is they turn the child to
the world and they go, "Okay, you're
safe with me. I am always here. But I'm
going to give you a push and you're
going to go out into the world and
you're going to see what the world is
like. And I'm going to be the person who
gives you the resilience and gives you
the social skills and gives you what you
need to be able to do that. And you can
always come back to me when it goes
wrong." So what we say with a with a
father's attachment is it's based on
nurture and challenge. Mom is very
nurturing. Dad is stimulation. I'm going
to stimulate you and you're going to go
and do something amazing. And and that
is why you need fathers because those
outcomes we have for kids who don't have
an input from a father figure. The
reason why they struggle with antisocial
behavior is it's because dads are the
ones that underpin social behavior.
Pro-social behavior like helping,
sharing, caring, emotional regulation
and inhibition. You need to learn to
regulate your emotions and inhibit them
appropriately to get on in this world.
You can't go into school and you cannot
go into the workplace screaming your
head off when you get angry. That's not
how it works. We know that fathers when
it comes to education, both moms and
dads have a pretty equal input in terms
of academic success. But fathers have a
greater role in instilling appropriate
learning behavior, being in the
classroom, taking in what's going on,
cooperating with other people,
cooperating with the teacher, not
disturbing everybody else, that kind of
thing. They are the ones that underpin
that. How do they do that? Is it
chemically or is it It's several things.
It's partly chemical. So, we know that
ch one of the earliest behaviors you
will see a father do with a child from
about six months on is a thing called
rough and tumble play. Rough and tumble
play. Okay? And men seem to be drawn to
it. Not all men do it, and we'll talk
about the people who don't find it
comfortable, but most men when we just
tell them to go and do something with
their kid, they're not going to do some
coloring. They're going to take the kid
outside. They're going to throw it in
the air. They're going to chase it
around the garden. They're going to
airplane it over their head. They're
going to come in. They're going to
bounce on the sofa. They're going to do
a little wrestling. There's lots of
shrieking. There's lots of energy. And
we see pretty much all western fathers
do that. And the reason for it is
twofold. First of all, it's a very quick
way of bonding with your child. Dads
have to bond through interaction. They
don't have the head start of child's
birth, which is a whole tsunami of
bonding hormones. So, they do it through
interaction. And rough and double play
is a really timeefficient way to do it.
You you get a massive tidal weight of
bonding hormones because it's because
it's so physical. So you get betrayphin
because uh there's lots of touch,
there's lots of giggling. So all of
these things release dopamine, betray,
oxytocin. They bond you tightly to the
child you're playing with and the child
gets them as well. But also it's
starting to underpin some teaching about
social skills because the basis of all
social um behavior is reciprocity is
give and take. And when we play with
someone, it only remains fun if that
reciprocity is reasonably balanced. You
learn empathy because you've got to work
out, is this stuff fun for the other
person or are they no longer enjoying
this? Have I gone too far? You learn to
deal with challenge. Rough and tumble
play can be pretty extreme. It can be a
little bit painful. It can be a little
bit risky. And so you're saying to the
kid, assess the risk. Assess the risk.
Here's the challenge. Can you deal with
the challenge? And all of that underpins
that child's neural development first of
all, but also you're showing by example
social skills. I'm saying reciprocity.
But what's really interesting, and I
love this piece of research, and this
came out from a group in Israel headed
by Ruth Feldman, who is a pioneer of
neuroscience in terms of children and
their parents. she um she found that
dads and children have co-eolved to
prefer to play with each other.
Okay. So, when you're a parent, you will
get a peak in oxytocin from certain
behaviors you do with your child. You'll
always get a bit of oxytocin because
anything you do with them is probably
very nice apart from maybe the tantrums.
But if you're a dad, that peak in
oxytocin comes from playing with your
kid. And then when we look at kids when
they the peak in um oxytocin release
they get when they're playing with their
dads again isn't when daddy gives me a
cuddle which is nice but you know I
don't get a big release it's when I play
with daddy. So is that different to
women? Yes. So women get their peak in
activate of oxytocin released from
nurturing their children particularly
from hugging them. And kids get their
peak in oxytocin when they interact with
mom from mom's cuddles not from playing
with mom. So naturally kids kind of
gravitate towards dads when they want to
have fun. And dad, that's the kind of
thing he will choose to do with his
child. Something that's um physical,
something that's stimulatory. And that's
what's really interesting. And that's in
a way why dad's kind of got the moniker
of, oh, you're the fun parent. You do
all the fun stuff. But actually, play is
fundamental to a child's development.
Absolutely fundamental to their social
development and also building that
really critical bond with dad. If I was
to have a baby now, how would my body,
my my brain, my my body, how would it
change? Okay, it would change in two
ways. There's the biological changes you
would undergo. So this is something that
we didn't know about 20 years ago and I
and other colleagues around the world
have have looked into this and the
reason why we looked into it is because
as I said very rare to have human
fathering really rare 5% of mammals and
the way evolution works is it generally
doesn't cause a whole new behavior to
evolve without giving you some sort of
head start in being able to do it. And
so over time, in the last half a million
years, as fatherhood evolved, men's
brains change, their psychology changes,
their hormones change when they become
fathers to to give you that that prep to
be a parent. Um, so first of all, we see
hormonal changes. The the most studied
and I think probably the most
significant is the drop in testosterone
that occurs when you become a father. So
you will have already experienced a drop
in testosterone because you're in a
long-term relationship. No, no, I
haven't. Yes, you have.
So, when a man enters a long-term
relationship for a first for the first
time, he will experience a drop in
testosterone because testosterone is a
really great chemical uh if you're
dating because it makes you more
competitive and it makes you more
attractive if you if you're in a
heterosexual relationship. So, it makes
you more attractive. But when you start,
you know, living with someone or being
in a long-term relationship, we kind of
need you to shift your focus from the
horizon and looking for another date.
and we need you to focus on that that
one person because from an evolutionary
point of view that person is going to be
the person you have kids with and we'd
quite like you to stick around and look
after those kids. So that happens when
you become a father for the first time
it drops again and it can be up to 30%.
So you lose a third of your testosterone
and the reason for that again is we need
you to focus in on the family. We we
can't have you looking to the horizon
for another mate. We need to focus
because we know that children need input
from just more than just mom to survive.
This sounds all very monogous. I'll talk
about it in a minute. Okay. So, this is
so so you focus in on that child.
Testosterone is also um when it's very
high, it blocks the bonding hormones.
So, dopamine and oxytocin in particular
have less of an effect. So, the
testosterone drops also to enable you to
start bonding with that child because
you are you are behind in terms of
bonding with that child because mom's
gone through pregnancy in in most cases
and given birth. So, she's had a head
start. She's had a load of oxytocin,
dopamine, and beta endorphin during the
birth process. You haven't. So, so we
need to like release those hormones as
soon as we can. One of the ways we do
that is testosterone drops. So, oxytocin
and dopamine are more effective, which
explains why some fathers say that they
don't feel bonded to their child in the
early stages or before. Yeah, I'll
explain why that is as well in a minute.
So, that's oxytocin, dopamine. We also
know just generally from studies whether
men are fathers or not, men with lower
testosterone tend to be more motivated
to care for children. So even if you're
not a father, if we present you with a
crying baby, men with very high
testosterone, the reaction to that is
mainly aversive, like okay, just take it
away from me. And also they get quite
frustrated. They find it quite quite
difficult to deal with as a noise. Men
with low testosterone tend to be more
motivated to pick the baby up, try and
soo the baby and deal with it. And and
whilst it's a difficult noise to hear,
they tend not to experience negative
emotions in relation to it. That drop in
testosterone is really really important.
Over evolutionary time
we think that people were probably
socially monogous for a period of time
which matched the period of time they
needed to ensure that our child's going
to survive. So whilst in our you know in
our um culture it's like no you will
marry till you die, you will be monogous
till you die. In evolutionary history
that probably wasn't the case. Fathers
might have stuck around for probably at
least until uh childhood which is
between about 5 and 10. They might have
stayed along into into the teenage years
depending upon how difficult the
environment was. And also this doesn't
mean they weren't having sex somewhere
else. So this is social monogamy. We
also see changes in oxytocin rises. Uh
if you live with your pregnant partner,
it will start to rise in pregnancy as
well your partners. Um, and that's there
to make sure first of all that your bond
to your partner tightens because you're
about to introduce somebody new into
your relationship and it's not going to
be easy. So, we need that to be tight,
but it's also to start preparing you for
after birth. We know that vasop prein
also rises. Vasopressin is a sort of
form of oxytocin, but in non-human
mammals, it's associated with defense of
the nest. And we think in in male
humans, it's to do with protection and
motivation to protect that child. And
finally, we see an increase in a in a
parenting hormone known as prolactin.
And prolactin is only seen in males in
species that have investing fathers. And
prolactin again is a parenting hormone
that motivates you to care. So you go
through this massive change in hormones.
A lot of men say they don't notice the
drop in testosterone in terms of things
like strength. So I get a contact by a
lot of men saying, "But I I love weight
training. Is this going to ruin my No,
it's not. It doesn't do anything like
that. Think of the number of Olympic
athletes who have kids. You're fine."
Um, what it does do is it it it
increases your emotional vulnerability.
So quite often with fathers, you will
hear they're more empathetic after birth
and also they find it harder to deal
with emotionally difficult things
particularly like on the news. Suddenly
things on the news will make them cry
when they never cried before. Will they
ever get their testosterone levels back?
Only if you don't have contact with your
child.
So if you don't have contact with your
child, you don't have to co-reside with
your child. These studies have been done
across cultures including cultures where
co-resident doesn't occur. Um, as long
as you are in contact with your child,
no, they won't because you you are still
maintained in looking after that child.
If you lose contact with your child,
yes, they will go back up because the
evolutionary drive is to then reproduce
again. So, if I have a kid and then I
stick around and raise the kid,
assuming I stick around, my testosterone
levels will never get back to the level
it was before I had the kid. No, never.
I mean that's slightly I mean I you know
I'll love my future kid I'm sure I will
say to dads because they do worry about
and I understand why they worry about it
because they believe very much that
testosterone is the male hormone. It is
and it isn't you know women have
testosterone and it's it's one of the
sex hormones. It's not it really isn't
associated with things like stress. You
might find things like your
if you have a tendency to aggression,
you might find that drops a little bit
and as I say, you become more empathetic
and you become more emotionally
vulnerable, but it's really it's not
going to impact a huge amount
physiologically in you. So really don't
worry about it. And also you get the
most amazing rewarding bond with your
kid in return. So you drop the
testosterone, but you get this
astonishing bond. So it swings and
roundabouts. You said earlier that if
the father's not around, there's
implications for teenage mental health.
Yes. So because fathers underpin
resilience through starting with rough
and tumble play but carrying on through
that child's life and doing stimulatory
activities with that kid. They're the
ones that underpin mental resilience.
And obviously mental resilience is
particularly key for mental health also
because they underpin scaffolding the
child's ability to operate in the social
world. A lot of the disorders we see in
teenage um young people are associated
with social situations. So social
anxiety, eating disorders, self harm,
depression, loneliness, they tend to all
exist within the social sphere. And
because of that, that's why it's
actually the relationship you have with
your dad, particularly the attachment
relationship you have. So if it's a nice
secure attachment relationship, you are
much less likely to suffer from those
disorders and also particularly you know
how much time your dad spends with you
and inputs into you is important. So
kids are really interesting. They
measure their importance to their
parents in different ways. If you say to
them, "How do you know you're important
to your mom?" They'll say, "Well, my mom
does stuff for me. She makes sure I've
got my favorite cereal. She makes sure
that I get picked up from school and I
can have my playdates and she, you know,
makes sure my sports kit is washed." And
I mean, it's all terribly gender
specific. I do apologize, but this is
this is the data. If you say to the kid,
"How do you know you're important to
your dad? He spends time with me." And
we think it's probably cultural because
in our culture, dads are still more
likely to be out at work. So, the
precious thing you you have as a man is
your time. And if I give my time to you
as a child, particularly if I do
something you're interested in and I
accept you as an individual and say,
"Yeah, let's be enthusiastic about what
you want to do, then that is what
underpins how you feel, how that how
important that child feels, and that
underpins their self-esteem." Because I
talked about ketosis on this podcast and
ketones, a brand called Ketone IQ sent
me their little product here and it was
on my desk when I got to the office. I
picked it up. It sat on my desk for a
couple of weeks. And one day I tried it
and honestly I have not looked back ever
since. I now have this everywhere I go.
When I travel all around the world, it's
in my hotel room. My team will put it
there. Before I did the podcast
recording today that I've just finished,
I had a shot of Ketone IQ. And as is
always the case when I fall in love with
a product, I called the CEO and asked if
I could invest a couple of million quid
into their company. So I'm now an
investor in the company as well as them
being a brand sponsor. I find it so easy
to drop into deep focused work when I've
had one of these. I would love you to
try one and see the impact it has on
you, your focus, your productivity, and
your endurance. So, if you want to try
it today, visit ketone.com/stephven
for 30% off your subscription. Plus,
you'll receive a free gift with your
second shipment. That's
ketone.com/stephven.
I'm excited for you. I am. I started my
first business at 12 years old and then
I started more businesses at 14, 15, 16,
17 and 18. And at that time, what I
didn't realize is that being a founder
with no money meant that I also had to
be the marketeteer, the sales rep, the
finance team, customer service, and the
recruiter. But if you're starting a
business today, thankfully there's a
tool that wears all of those hats for
you, our sponsor today, which is
Shopify. Because of all of its AI
integrations, using Shopify feels a bit
like you've hired an entire growth team
from day one, taking care of writing
product descriptions, your website
design, and enhancing your products
images, not to mention the bits you'd
expect Shopify to handle, like the
shipping, like the taxes, like the
inventory. And if you're looking to get
your business started, go to
shopify.com/bartlet
and sign up for a $1 per month trial.
That's shopify.com/bartlet.
We talked at the top of this
conversation about how gender roles have
shifted and how more women are college
educated and more women are in work and
they're climbing the economic ladder.
This also means that mothers are more
likely to be around less in such a world
especially when we consider the way that
the offices have been designed and the
working week has been designed. Have you
thought much about the implications of
an absent mother? Because we talked a
lot about the absent father. Yeah. But
an absent mother or a mother who puts
their child into into daycare or is
working five five days a week. I must
admit I haven't because I I don't study
mothers. Mothers is a massive amount of
work done on uh and I'm kind of filling
the gaps in terms of fathers to be
absolutely honest. The roles of a mom
and a dad in a heterosexual relationship
have evolved to kind of complement each
other. So they don't mirror each other.
They don't do the same thing. Um they
complement each other. So what happens
when we take one of those away for that
child? There are two things to say to
that. First of all, in most children's
lives, we talk about single parent
families and what we're talking about is
a single parent raising that child. But
actually, if we look outside that that
particular diad, that particular couple,
and we look at who else is inputting
into that child's life. So quite often,
I study it as obviously in relation to
absent fathers, what we tend to find is
that child has other people in their
life who are men who input, even if the
mom hasn't recognized it. One of the
most powerful studies I read wasn't
saying to a mom, "Where are the father
figures in your child's life?" It was
saying to the kid, "Who are the
important men in your life?" And the kid
would go, "Oh, my football coach or my
math teacher or my mate John's dad or
they often recognize father figures.
They don't call them that, but they
recognize men in their lives who they
look up to, who support them, who the
parents or the mom doesn't even think
about. So that's the first thing to say.
Secondly, we know with gay fathers where
a mom isn't in a caretaking role, the
brain adapts.
Okay. So, what happens if we put um a
heterosexual couple in a scanner? Yeah.
And we say, "Look, look at look at this
video of your child." We see different
peaks in activation in the brain. So, in
mom, we see a peak in activation at the
core of the brain here. Okay? Very
ancient. It's partly there because
mothering is as old as time. So, it's in
the ancient unconscious part of the
brain. This is where nurture is,
attachment, risk detection, all those
things you need to be able to do.
Uh, and then we get that peak there.
However, if we look at dad's activation,
he does have some activation here.
Obviously, he does. He's very capable of
nurturing and protecting. But actually,
the peak in activation is in the
neoortex. This is this bit of the brain.
This is the conscious brain. It's much
younger. Um, and that shows you that
fathering is younger. It's about half a
million years old. And we see activation
here in the social part of the brain.
Okay. So this is the prefrontal cortex
which is here and the orbital frontal
cortex which is kind of above your eyes
and that's where all your social skills
sit your ability to do everything
socially. And then at the back of the
brain we have two areas at the back of
the brain which are linked to empathy
which is the basis of relationships and
mentalizing. So that's that ability to
know someone's intention. You need it
just to have a conversation but you also
need it uh to spot somebody who's going
to maybe do you bad in some way, cheat,
lie, whatever those sorts of things.
Again important in the social world and
his peing activations are there. Again,
mom does have some peaks in activ some
activation here, but it's not as
intense. And that underpins those two
different roles. So, dad's attachment is
neo. Mom's attachment is very ancient
and nurturing. If you have a gay primary
caretaking father without a mother
involved, what you see is you see both
bits light up at the same intensity. So,
he gets the dad activation obviously
being a man, but he also gets the mom's
activation. And what's really absolutely
fascinating is if we look at that brain,
there is a new a brand new neural
connection between
this bit of the brain here and this bit
of the brain here. So they can
communicate. So is the is a woman not
playing a unique role at all in raising?
Well, arguably neither is a man because
if we look in if we were to look in
probably uh a gay woman's brain, we'd
see the same thing. And it's not saying
that they're not paying unique roles in
a heterosexual relationship. They
absolutely do. But what it's showing
you, human children are incredibly
difficult to raise. They are pretty
much, apart from maybe dolphins and and
a bit of an ape, um the most intense kid
to raise because they're because they're
born so helpless. Okay? And the only way
a human baby can survive is if it gets
enough input. So the human brain, the
human parenting brain is astonishingly
plastic and it will adapt to make sure
that that child gets what it needs. And
so where we've got one of the adults
missing, mom or dad, it will adapt to
say, okay, the remaining adult or
whether even if there's two dads or two
moms, that primary caretaking one, their
brain will alter to make sure that kid
start gets what it needs. It kind of
goes to the top of what we were saying
about do you need dads then? Because if
you know, we talked about the role that
dads play in play, but also I've read
your research around the impact that a
father has on um a kid's ability to
speak. Yes.
is better in children who had a father
present. But if you could just have two
women doing it, doesn't that mean that
we don't necessarily need the father?
It's not that you don't necessarily need
the father. I mean, the same argument
say you don't necessarily need a mother
in a gay parenting relationship with the
fathers. What it's saying is
in a heterosexual relationship we get
this complimentarity. We can't get that
in a gay relationship. So what we've got
instead is this slice to adaptation.
Unfortunately, the studies haven't been
done sufficiently on gay parenting,
which is which is a massive omission.
I'm afraid science always starts with
heterosexual. Yeah. Um and narrows it
down. Um that we don't know exactly
whether for example
a gay parent, two male parents, maybe
there's a little bit missing because of
a lack of female input or whether with
two female parents is a lack of because
there's no male direct male input. The
other thing to say is around these
families you pro you know I can there
are very few gay parenting families
where there are no women involved at all
and there are very few lesbian couples
who have no male involvement at all. So
we it's a very complex mess really in
terms of what the inputs are. But I
think the the the study that discovered
this were just astonished at the amazing
plasticity of the brain that that a man
who did not go through pregnancy and
childirth and is does not have this
evolutionarily ancient instinct in terms
of motherhood could actually adopt this
role and we would see this activation.
That's in a way the biggest takehome
from it is that it will adapt in such a
powerful way to make sure that child
gets what it needs. So do we need
fathers? Yes.
Why? What is it that the fathers bring
that can't be done by some other means
though? Because we don't yet know first
of all whether these adaptations in the
female brain for example are enough
because that research hasn't been done
and secondly there are very few children
who don't have a father actually if you
look at their social grouping. Now it
might not be a father who co-resides. It
might not be a father who they see that
frequently, but it could be, you know,
and when we remember we're talking about
grandfathers, uncles, teachers, coaches,
whoever it might be. It might be a whole
team of men who step in and out at
different times. It's very rare that a
child doesn't have any male input in
their life. And that is what a father
is. It's not your biological father.
So, is it that we need a father figure
around, but we don't necessarily need a
father in the home? you do not have to
co-reside. One of the things that drives
me slightly around the bend is when
people talk about absent fathers.
Um sometimes the father is truly absent.
Absolutely. But in some cases he's not.
He just doesn't live there. And that's
what we've got to be very clear about.
You do not have to co-reside. And there
are cultures in the world where
co-resident is not the norm. And so it's
about being in your child's life. You do
not have to live with them. Are we
getting more fatherless as a western
society?
It would seem so at the moment in terms
of biological fathers. Yes.
Unfortunately, and that's one of the
things that we really need to to focus
on. I've recently become a trustee of a
new policy unit which is the center for
research into men and boys. And my role
there is to look at the role of fathers,
how we support fathers, how we support
boys in having male figures in their
lives. because we are seeing because
divorce has become more culturally
acceptable possibly because of longer
lifespans and relationships aren't
lasting as long. There's lots of reasons
why we are getting more children who do
not have fathers in their lives. It's
also a major issue in the US. I you know
I know you know Richard Reeves and I
work with Richard Reeves on it and that
is issue and that's why we have to start
looking in a creative way about what a
father is because those kids don't
necessarily have their biological father
in life but they need somebody and that
might be encouraging links within the
community. It might be helping single
mothers identify those male figures
within their environment and supporting
those male figures and coming forward.
It might be that we need more
organizations like Lads and Need Dads
which is an organization in the UK that
provides male father figures, mentors to
boys who don't have a father in their
life. Is there anything better than a
biological father? Yes, a father. There
is. So even if it's a sort of a
stepfather or if it's because you don't
get to become a father indeed you don't
get to become a mother just because you
happen to conceive a child. So from a
development perspective, it doesn't
matter if there's no difference in
biological fathers versus, you know,
Dave who took took care of me because
the changes we spoke about happen
whether you're biologically related to
that child or not because they happen
through interaction. So any man who
steps in and does the job well see the
hormone changes, we'll see the brain
changes which we we haven't spoken
about, um we'll see the psychological
changes, they will see them all because
they happen through interaction. So you
don't you're not as a biological father
the moment you conceive that child
suddenly get this mysterious ability to
be a father. You don't it happens
because you happen to be interacting and
live and and and inputting into that
child's life. So no there is no
hierarchy.
It's are you doing the job? Yes I am.
Are you doing it in a good and healthy
and positive way? Yes I am. Okay. You
get to be dad. So you really you're
making the case for father figures.
Yeah. in a child's life versus and and a
and a child growing up without a father
figure at all, yes, is going to have
worse outcomes. There is a risk. They
won't necessarily, but the statistics
are quite powerful in terms of those
outcomes. There was a study done
recently in the UK by the Center for
Justice called Lost Boys and that was
looking at and and one aspect of that
was looking at boys and their outcomes
if they don't have a father figure and
it is quite powerful in terms of the
increased risk of having negative
outcomes. So if you're in a lesbian
relationship
and you're so two women,
are you saying that you really
should make sure that the child is
exposed to a father figure? Yeah, I
would say that. I would say that. I
mean, some people I get attacked for
saying things like that and I'm not
trying to say there are gender roles or
any of those sorts of things, but we h
children have evolved. The reason why
human fatherhood evolved is because
children evolved to be brought up by a
group of people. And part of that group
of people was a father figure. Now, as
we see from cultures around the world,
it does not have to be the biological
father, but they have a father figure or
a team of father figures. It doesn't
have to be one person. It could be
several people. And does that go the
other way? If you're in if two men
married, I would always advise that that
that's how children to have those two
inputs. So, find those women in your
life and and ask them to step in and do
that. And and another anomaly that we
hear a lot is that it's particularly
important for boys. Actually,
it is critical for boys, but arguably
it's kind of touch and go as whether
it's more critical for girls. Um the
data coming out about
daughters and the impact that fathers
have on daughters is pretty powerful
stuff. And so it's it's not just that we
need these father figures so boys know
how to grow up to be, you know, positive
masculine figures, to be men, whatever
it might be. It's also really critical
for girls that they have a father figure
around. What's the the data coming out
regarding the dad daughter bond? So what
we're finding is um daughters who grow
up with uh a secure attachment to their
father um they have increased abilities
in or increased success in terms of
academics in terms of education. They
have increased career success. They tend
to have much better me uh mental health.
They tend to be much better at
relationships. They tend to have less
risky particularly sexual relationships.
And they have just better well-being
scores. And they are much more likely as
I said to have stable good relationships
in their in their older life in their
adult life. When you think about society
and how we're forming our relationships,
especially around child rearing. Yes.
What are we increasingly getting wrong
here? I spoke to Erica Commisser. And
she's very passionate about the
detrimental impact of daycare, right?
because she feels that the mother's
plays a critical role in those first two
years and then the father plays a
critical role beyond from about two
years onwards when the kid starts to get
into that play phase. I would argue with
her on that point but okay which point
would you argue on the second point?
Yeah, that is critical from the moment
that child is born. Um and I I get quite
upset when I get father s I met a father
the other day at an event. He I think
his baby was six months old and he was a
he was a a dad worker this guy. He
worked with dads. He was a he was a
community worker who worked with with
dads with older kids. He said, "Oh, I've
had my I was like, "Congratulations." He
went, "Yeah, but you know, I know I'm
not particularly important until, you
know, until baby's like, you know, at
least 18 months, two years." So, I'm
just changing nappies, but I know that
I'm not I'm not really doing much. And I
was just like, "Oh my god, I literally
cannot believe this man is saying this,
bearing in mind what he does for a
living." I was like, "You are absolutely
critical. From the moment that baby is
born, you are critical." Why? Because
the baby's brain is growing. babies are
b so human babies are born months before
they should be and the reason for that
is because two anatomical anomalies we
are bipedal and we have an enormous
brain at full size our brain is six
times bigger than it should be for a
mammal of our body weight it's highly
encphilized so enphilization is all this
folded and folded and folded so it's
folded like this because we've got a ram
it into our skull if you look at the
brain of a mouse it's smooth so when we
became bipeedal about fully bipedal
about sort of 1.8 8 million years ago.
Bipedal meaning two legs. If you look at
at something that walks on four legs,
like an ape, a chimp, who's our close,
their their legs are quite wide apart,
so their birth canal is really broad.
Um, ours is really narrow because we've
had to come in like this to to maintain
being able to stand upright. So, if we
tried to birth our babies when their
brains were nearly fully grown, like
happens in other apes, mom would die,
baby would die, and our species would
have died out a very long time ago. So,
about 1.8 8 million years ago, we we
reached a threshold where the brain had
to do some growing after we were born.
And the way that we dealt with that was
we birthed our babies early. We selected
to birth our babies early. And that's
why they're so completely helpless.
Because if you look at a chimp baby, a
chimp baby's pretty mobile just after
it's born. It's got pretty good motor
function. It can hold on to stuff. It
can do various things. Can't feed
itself, but it can. Um whereas human
babies, they can't do anything for
themselves. They literally can't. They
can't focus. They can't hold their head
up. They can't move. They can't
coordinate their limbs. They can't clean
themselves. They can't do anything. And
that's because they're born far too
early. They should be in months longer
essentially. So, we have this period of
rapid brain growth after we're born. And
because the main bit of the brain that's
growing at this point is this massive
preffrontal cortex, which is the social
bit. Um, the environment in which you
grow up is critical. And who is really
important in the social bit? The dad. So
from the moment your baby is born and
this is growing, dad needs to be having
an input because this is where it's
growing. Mom is also obviously vital,
but we have to have both parents
involved or you have to have that input
at that point. So these dads who believe
or people who believe that dad's only
important after two years, I'm I'm
sorry, you have a fundamental
misunderstanding of how the brain
develops and of child development
because you need to start teaching that
child by inputting into that child by by
giving that sensory input in particular.
Human babies need a lot of touch. They
need a lot of smell. They need a lot of
all that kind of thing. You need to be
doing that as early as possible because
this is growing from the moment it comes
out. Is it fair to say that in that 0ero
to2 phase, mothers are more important?
No, because they do different things.
They do different things. Mothers tend
to be more involved partly because of um
the fact that from a biological point of
view, women give birth. Um if you're
breastfeeding, they're the only ones who
can do that. So we are tied in terms of
um having to do that. The other thing I
would say is also giving birth is a
really really tricky thing to do and
it's physically and emotionally utterly
draining. So you need a period of
recovery um and therefore you you are
the one who's basically at home
particester
context a baby from the moment it's born
generally in some cultures will be cared
for by both mom and dad. It's only
because we have this capitalist system
where someone's got to go and earn some
money that dads don't. So I wouldn't
necessarily argue moms are more
important. They are in a position from a
biological point of view that they're
going to be there. They are just going
to be there. And in our system that
means somebody else it doesn't have to
be there and that's dad and he'll go and
earn the money to support the family.
But you they need the input from both.
Is it fair to say then that the primary
caregiver is the most important? And
what I mean by that is the baby's going
to form strongest attachment to the
person taking most care of it and
therefore its attachment style will be
shaped by the relationship to that
primary caregiver. It's really tricky to
say because yes, primary caregivers are
really important in terms of being most
of the environment of development in
those early days, particularly if this
what we call I don't really like calling
them secondary care, but the other
parent is out and about and therefore
not present. The environment in which a
baby grows isn't just about who's
caretaking them, who's giving them a
hug. One of the things I really always
talk to parents to be about is your
relationship builds that environment as
well. So parents are actually babies are
also actually taking on board the
dynamics between their parents.
And one of the things that I always um
try to get into anti courses is
preparing the parenting relationship
because actually you need to build an
environment which is
as calm and as reciprocal and as safe as
you can do for that child. And that
means for example before you have a baby
learning good conflict management style.
You're going to have an argument. Okay?
It's not about having an argument. It's
about the reconciliation of that
argument. It's about the resolution of
that argument. So, it's about that. It's
about understanding difference. You're
going to parent in different ways. That
can be really challenging to some
couples. They find it very difficult.
So, you prepare them for that. So, the
environment is not just the primary
caretaker. And that's what's fascinating
about humans is human babies is it's a
nap saying, it's a true saying are
raised by a village. So, the environment
of development isn't just the primary
caretaken parent. It's everybody who's
around that child as well. And in our in
our world that might be family, that
might be friends where we live greater
distances from our family. So sometimes
that's more professionals that have an
input into that child's life. I guess
I'm trying to figure out what's optimal
in my relationship cuz I'm probably
about to head into parenthood. Yeah. And
I'm trying to understand, you know, I'm
trying to understand how what I should
configure my situation. Yes. In those
early years um with my partner and me,
we both work. Um my job is requires me
to fly a little bit more than hers. um
but just just because that's the way
that I've chosen my my career to be. She
spends more time at home but still very
very busy, still flying around the world
doing her own thing. So I'm thinking
when that baby arrives, what should we
based on everything you know about
humans and human history and the human
brain and everything that's
interconnected? What's the optimal
optimal scenario for me and my partner?
Do you know something? It's really hard
because what I always say to parents
because parents are really good at
beating themselves up is happy parents
make happy babies. So, first of all, you
have to do what works for you and
everybody's circumstances are different.
And there are needs that everybody's
going to have. So, yes, your baby has
needs in terms of nurturance, in terms
of support, in terms of building
attachments, but your baby also needs a
roof over their head, and they need food
on the table, and they need all that,
and they need whoever's caring for them
to be healthy. So, it really depends
upon what works for you. In an ideal
world, somebody asked me the other day,
because at the moment in the UK, we're
having a lot of campaigns about
paternity leave. Um, in the UK at the
moment you can have two weeks, which is
frankly laughable. Um, and the dad can
have two weeks. The dad can have two
weeks. Not if you're self-employed, but
if you're employed, um, if you're
self-employed, you're kind of on your
own. We're trying to push the government
to take it to six weeks, which isn't our
ideal, but it's how far we think we
might be able to push them. Somebody
asked me the other day, what would be
the ideal for a dad? I'm afraid I
started at 6 months. Please, that would
be lovely. In places like Sweden, the
dad gets a year. Um because babies
develop with different inputs from
different people. I know you're in a
heterosexual couple. So he your baby
will need your dad's input and mom's
input and they will need those in every
whatever configuration works for you. So
it might be that at some period
particularly after child birth and
stuff, your partner is going to have to
have time off. She is not going to, you
know, it's very hard to race back to
work after you've had a baby. Some women
manage it. I think they're astonishing.
I certainly couldn't have done it. So
that's fine. You go do that. but that
she's going to need a period of time.
But then are you in a situation where
you can work a little bit flexibly? So
is there is there a point where you can
say okay you go and do some work and
I'll take the baby for a bit and you
switch that way. Now obviously if the
mom is breastfeeding it's harder because
she is tied more to the baby. You can
express milk as much as you like but
it's quite difficult as a breastfeeding
mother to go off on a work trip for a
week. So so the first point there is
really that she's probably going to need
to take some time. She is going to need
to take some time unless she is in a
position where she really thinks that
she is going to be capable of physically
and psychologically going back to work.
I've met women who do it, but it's
really hard. Now, particularly when in
those first early weeks, actually, she's
going to need you or she's going to need
someone to help her. My husband is
self-employed. Um, my husband actually
only managed to have two days of
paternity leave before he had to go back
to work. So, my wonderful mom stepped
in. But, she's going to need somebody
there. In an ideal world, as long as you
were happy to do that, that would be you
because your baby would really benefit
from that. And then from there, you have
to take it the way it works for you in
terms of your career because whoever
looks after that baby, it doesn't have
to be mom or or dad. It can be a mixture
of both. But but I'm able to make
concessions. Maybe I'm I'm in a
privileged position where I can make I
can kind of design my life a little
Well, from a from an ideal point of view
then you will at that point try and be
with your baby as much as you can and do
that and do as many of the tasks with
your baby you can because actually from
your point of view as a man men the
psychological changes that a man goes
through when he becomes a father it's
known as the transition to parenthood in
most men who work it takes two years and
one of the reasons it takes two years
whereas in a mother it takes about nine
months is because one of the factors in
how quickly you transition to adopting
that identity And how comfortable you
feel with that identity is down to
competency. How competent do you feel as
a parent? Now many western dads, they
don't get the opportunity to reach
competency very quickly because they
have to go to work. So they don't get to
care for their baby. And that's one of
the things we know that men who get that
chance transition to parenthood much
quicker because they reach competency
quicker. They absorb the identity of
being a dad quicker and that is better
for them. This transition to parenthood,
is that a biological thing? It's it's
underpinned by the biology by the by the
um brain changes and hormone changes
you're going to undergo. But it's a
psychological state. So it's about
configuring your identity and absorbing
that particular new aspect of your
identity into who into your sense of
being and also feeling comfortable with
that. We know men who struggle with that
transition are much more likely to
suffer from postnatal depression for
example. And postnatal depression has a
fundamental impact not only on your
partner but also on your child. So, we
want to be protective against that. So,
she needs some time. Um, she's going to
need me for supportive reasons in those
early weeks. And then the more time I
can spend with my child, the more I'm
going to psychologically adjust to and
the more and the quicker you're going to
build your bond because as I said
earlier, you build your bond through
interaction
and your your partner's going to have a
head start. She just is because of
pregnancy and ch and if she's
breastfeeding as well, breastfeeding is
really good for releasing oxytocin. You
have to do it through interaction. And
in those early weeks with a baby,
they're very dependent. And particularly
if your partner is breastfeeding,
they're very mom focused because she is
the source of food. And newborn babies
feed for ages. So a lot of men say to
me, I want to build a relationship, but
I literally cannot find an end. So what
we say is make something special. So
make something that's yours. It could be
bath time. It could be reading your baby
a book. It's never too early to begin
reading your baby a book. Or a really
good one is baby massage. Baby massage
is great because touch is is the biggest
releaser of bonding hormones there are.
If you massage your baby, your baby's
getting all those lovely hormones and so
are you. So, you're building that bond
between you. You're close enough that so
your baby's getting sensory input,
particularly sense of smell. So, baby's
vision is not great when they're born,
but their sense of smell is brilliant
because they're little mammals. So,
they're starting to really get your
smell and that's going to help them
attach to you. We also know baby massage
is one of the only really good
interventions that prevents postnatal
depression in men. So, I love that. I
just had this little flash in my head of
all the babies that just got a massage
because you said that. Yeah. And they're
all blissed out. I mean, there's some
brilliant videos on YouTube. Oh, if you
want to learn, you don't have to go to a
class. Watch. There's wonderful videos
of baby massage and whole classes of men
massaging babies. I mean, it's
brilliant. So, you also want to be there
because you need to build that bond. And
the only way you're going to do that is
interaction. And so, and as your baby
develops, that interaction becomes
easier because the baby will start
babbling. They'll start smiling. in
about six to eight weeks they'll start
smiling and they'll start smiling at
you. Um and that's just you know that's
you can forgive them anything when they
do that. Um and then they'll start you
know really reacting when you come in
being pleased to see you then they'll
start giggling and then at about 6
months if you are a rough and tumble dad
you can start doing very gentle rough
and tumble play with them and and you
can just take it from there. The
interaction grows more and more and
more. One of the things we have to
prepare men for which I do a lot when I
work with men uh during pregnancy is the
delay in bonding. So, we have this idea
that baby's going to come out and we're
going to feel a flood of love and it's
going to be it's going to be like, you
know, shining, amazing, wonderful. That
doesn't happen for women a lot of the
time, but men find it very difficult
because because they grow their bond
through interaction. When the baby comes
out, they they tend to have a
recognition of connection. It's like,
yes, that's my baby. That's my genetic
baby. It's genetically related to me. I
am a father. I will look after it. But
it's very conscious. When I talk to my
dads quite often when I visit them at
two weeks, a lot of them are worrying
about the bond because they're not
feeling how they thought they would
feel. They're looking at their partner
who's had a head start and thinking,
"Well, she's the gold standard of
bonding. She's amazing at it. I'm
failing. My baby doesn't like me. I'm
rubbish at this." And that's not good
for their mental health. And what they
tend to do is withdraw from the baby,
which is the worst thing you can do. But
then when I speak to them when at six
months with the baby, they all say, "I
love my baby deeply." and it's
categorically different to how I felt at
the start and that's because they've had
to interact for that time to build that
bond. Is it fair to say that the woman's
bond comes more hormonally and the
father's reaction comes more from
interaction? Yeah, because you will get
your hormones from your interaction.
Whereas she has got her hormones mostly
uh at the start from being pregnant and
giving birth and breastfeeding. And
breastfeeding. So she's getting lots of
physiologically based hormones and she
will also get hormones from interaction.
Obviously she will, but she's ahead of
you. You're going to have to massage
that baby to go get You are really going
to have to massage that baby or play
with them. I guess that's the other
thing you said. Yeah. You mentioned
something before we started recording
which was curious to me and I've never
heard of before, which is you mentioned
um love drugs. Yes. I've never heard of
that before. Okay. I mean, what's that
like MDMA or something? Yes. So, we kind
of probably know just about enough about
the neuroscience of love now,
particularly the neurochemicals which
underpin it, that should we wish to, we
could finally produce the elixir of
love. So, since we've written things
down, we have been fascinated with
finding the elixir of love. There's
loads of ancient texts about potions
that will make you fall in love. It's
something that as humans, we've always
wanted and it's partly because love is
unpredictable and uncontrollable and
humans really can't deal with that. We
we like to know what is going to happen
and we like to be able to control it as
far as we can. So, wouldn't it be great
if you could pop a pill or drink
something which meant that when you went
out on a Friday night, you were really
good at either being like the the bell
of the ball and attracting people or you
could somehow get to be more attractive
to people or if you were in or you could
make someone fall in love with you or if
you're in a long-term relationship with
a struggling there was some pill that
would help that long-term relationship.
And we are kind of at that stage now
with the neuroscience where that would
potentially be possible. And there are
certainly research groups who are
looking into what chemicals are already
out there which kind of mimic that
neurochemistry. Now there are two big
ones that we already have. The first is
oxytocin. Of course oxytocin is
synthesized. We use it in child birth.
It induces child birth. Um, and in
studies where we wanted to work out the
impact of oxytocin on social behavior in
humans in labs, we squirt it up people's
noses. You can squirt it up people's
noses and see what oxytocin and what it
does if you want to know in most people
is it makes them more empathetic. It
makes them more open to chatting to
people. It makes them more sociable. It
makes them more positive about the
people around them from a social
context. So brilliant. So one of the
possibilities is you produce synthetic
oxytocin and you sell it to people. And
in fact, a few years ago, and I think
they've taken it down now, there was a
drug on Amazon and eBay called Oxy Love.
It's a little thing like a like an eye
drop thing. What it would do if you
squirted up your nose is hopefully it
would do what oxytocin does in the
normal biological context. It would
quiet your amydala. It would make you
more confident. Uh it would make you
feel more open to starting
relationships. You'd be better at
chatting to people. So, it's it's kind
of like, you know, the you know, a
couple of glasses of wine before you go
out. makes you feel a little bit more
confident. It would be a little bit like
that. And that's one of the things
they're looking into. The issue with it
is that you cannot guarantee the outcome
of using it. So what has been found is
in the vast majority of people it does
what it should. But there is a
significant minority of people where it
does exactly the opposite and it
actually increases e basically what we
call ethnosentrism, racism, bigotry.
Because what happens is they become more
tightly bonded to people they think are
in their ingroup. But if they perceive
you to be in their out group, they
become more racist. So it makes you
identify more with what you perceive to
be your ingroup. Now until you can iron
that out, that is not a drug you can
release onto the market because that is
not something you want to happen.
investigations seem to have shown that
it's something to do with genetics that
some people's oxytocin receptor gene is
slightly different and it's those people
who will get the um ethnosentrism result
rather than the socially confident
result. So that's a problem and you
can't go any further with oxytocin until
you are now that particular problem. The
second one which is more encouraging
from a from a scientific point of view
is MDMA, ecstasy. And for many years,
people have, you know, anecdotally
reported who use ecstasy recreationally
that it makes you feel overwhelming
sensations of love. It makes you feel
very bonded to everybody you're with. We
know from from lab studies that people
who take ecstasy on a regular basis
actually become more empathetic over
time. It actually seems to permanently
alter something. So, it seems to be
possibly something a bit like beach
endorphin, which it underpins long-term
love. Great. So they're engineering MDMA
at the moment to try and find out what
the dosage should be and how we could
give it to people. And it's being used
in marriage therapy in the US at the
moment as a trial to see if it can
assist in marriage therapy because a lot
of people who go to marriage therapy are
very entrenched in their position.
They've lost empathy. They've lost the
ability to see the other point of view.
And so if you micro dose ecstasy, which
I don't suggest anybody does without
clinical support, you go into the
session, it opens up your empathy and
you make progress because of it. And
there's been reasonably good results
from marriage therapy in a clinical
setting. The issue with MDMA isn't that
it has different outcomes for people to
be honest. Some people it works on some
people it just doesn't. So you could
take it for that reason and it just
wouldn't do what it's supposed to do.
Fine. The issue with MDMA is more around
ethics
because MDMA is a powerful drug and we
don't know yet what its long-term
consequences would be. For example, if
you did take it for many, many years.
The second thing we don't really know is
what happens if you stop. So let's say
you started a relationship taking MDMA.
Um first ethical question, should you
tell the person you're in the
relationship with? Secondly, what
happens if you stop? You get to the
point where for whatever reason you
decide to stop. Is that love going to go
away? And again, if you haven't told the
person, you're kind of, if it does go
away, mcking around with their life
without them actually realizing that
that relationship was based upon an
artificial stimulant. essentially we
have anecdotal um we don't actually know
whether it would stop because we haven't
done long-term enough studies
anecdotally from the recreational
community there have been stories about
people who have started relationships
whilst clubbing uh taking ecstasy
particularly one guy who um used to go
back to his hometown every weekend take
ecstasy go clubbing met a girl but used
to go away to work during the week so
every time he saw his girlfriend in the
first few months it was at the weekend
they were both he he was on she wasn't
and he fell fell in love with her and
this was wonderful and they carried on
and eventually they decided that
actually no we need to stop this long
distance thing she needs to move and and
come with me we think this has got a
future she does that trouble is during
the week he's not allowed on ecstasy and
quite quickly he realizes he doesn't
love her now he has uplifted you know
upheaval of her whole life now he didn't
do that on purpose he did not know that
that was what the impact would be but if
that's the impact of a love drug we have
a problem what do you do in
relationships with power imbalances is
what if you're in an abusive
relationship and somebody gives it you
without you knowing and keeps you in
that relationship because of it. So
there are lots of ethical questions. I
think the issue with love drugs is they
will probably come because they will be
hugely commercially successful if they
if they get a commercial license. When I
do talks and I get to this bit before
I've even mentioned what I I ask people
to raise their hand and say if a drug
could do this would you take it? 50% of
the audience raise their hand and say
yes I would. So then you tell them what
all the problems are and you tell them
what the ethics might be and at the end
I say again would you take it at least
sell 20% of the audience would. Now
because love and dating is such a
multi-billion dollar industry
if we get to the point where this can be
commercially produced someone is going
to make a lot of money and that's why I
think it's probably on the horizon
unless the rules are so strict that it's
only in clinical settings and even then
people get around rules. So that's the
issue with love drugs. Um the other one
is the SSRIs which are depress for
depression. People who are on SSRIs
realize that they um they reduce your
emotional abilities. They reduce your
libido. They reduce sensations of love.
And so it has been suggested again that
SSRIs are engineered in some way to help
people deal with love trauma. So people
who have experienced very bad
relationships and not that you can
forget it. Do you remember the filter
eternal sunshine? I didn't say that.
Right. Okay. It's about a guy who wants
to wipe his brain in terms of a really
bad relationship. And that's kind of
what suggested this could do. SSRIs
can't do that. You cannot wipe a memory,
but they could maybe take away some of
the salience, some of the negative
salants. The issue again with that is
that there are 72 countries in the world
where homosexuality is still illegal.
And we know there are certain uh this
was a brilliant book called love drugs
talked about a very extreme religious
community which was giving young men who
had had shown homosexual tendencies
SSRIs to reduce their homosexual
tendencies and that in itself is I
believe ethically unacceptable and
therefore again we've got to be aware
that if we produce drugs what could they
possibly be used for which is actually
unacceptable and how are we going to
deal with that as a as a population. So
I think anything which comes into our
intimate relationships like love drugs
or AI or whatever, we have to have that
conversation now because getting it
wrong has profound impacts on our
futures and on our health.
Let's talk about attachment styles and
monogamy and the neurodiversity
components of this. So if we start with
attachment styles, there's been so much
said about attachment styles. Can you
sort of give my viewers a overview of
what attachment styles are and what we
need to know about attachment styles as
it relates to falling and holding on to
love? Okay. I think the first thing you
need to understand is what is an
attachment relationship? Attachment
relationships are very rare in your
life. Um, you will have had them with
whoever brought you up, whoever cared
for you, particularly in the first two
years of life. That's particularly
significant. You will have them with
romantic partners. They're not all
romantic partners. And you might have
one with a best friend. They're very
emotionally intense. We recognize them
for several criteria. First of all,
they're developmentally significant. So,
attachment relationships have the
ability to change your psychology. Now,
as a child, they actually have the
ability to change your your actual brain
architecture as well, particularly in
those first two years because babies are
born without their brains fully
developed. That's why they're so
helpless. And in the first two years,
your brain is growing very rapidly. and
the environment to which you are raised
is going to fundamentally underpin the
architecture of your brain. So that's
developmentally very significant. That
first attachment relationship you have
with your parents, parents, carers,
whoever it has, whoever's bringing you
up. Babies will attach to literally
anybody who's meeting their needs to be
honest. Um and that will fundamentally
alter your brain and either in a good
way or unfortunately in a less good way
depending on how you're brought up. When
you have a romantic relationship, what
they can do is they can alter your
psychology, particularly how anxious you
are about being abandoned in that
relationship and how comfortable you are
with emotional and physical intimacy.
Because I will tell you a story when I
met my husband, I was very worried about
him leaving me, him abandoning me. And I
dealt with that by being monumentally
clingy. And over time, we've been
married for nearly 25 years. I became
secure because he disproved my fear that
he was going to leave and I am now
secure. So he fundamentally changed my
psychology. So they can do that and in
romantic relationships there are four
types of attachment relationship and we
place you in one of those sectors based
upon two different factors. The first is
how anxious you are about abandonment.
Okay, that's the first one. We ask you
lots of questions to work out how
anxious you are about that. The second
one is how much you want to maintain
proximity. So again, we'll ask you
questions about how close you like to be
to the person, whether you maintain
closeness because you're anxious, or
whether you maintain closeness because
you love intimacy, or whether you run
away from intimacy at a rate of not. And
depending on how you answer, we put you
in one of four categories. So if you are
not anxious in relationships about
abandonment, but you are very
comfortable with proximity, emotional,
physical intimacy, then you're secure.
And it's what it sounds like. you are
very comfortable in your individuality.
You gain huge benefits from being in
that relationship but you don't need
that relationship to exist to define
you. The next one is people who are
highly anxious about abandonment and
crave proximity and that was me
preoccupied. So they are very anxious
about being left and the way they deal
with it like I did was to cling to to
maintain because if I keep an eye on you
it's going to be okay. Then we have the
two um avoidant attachment styles. So
first of all, we have people who are
very anxious about being abandoned but
don't maintain proximity. They find
intimacy very uncomfortable. And the
reason for that, they're known as
fearful avoidant people. And the reason
they do that is the way they cope with
the stress of possibly being left is
they just don't have relationships
because then I can't be hurt if you do
that. And finally, we have dismissing
avoidant. dismissing avoidant people are
the smallest part of the population
generally and they um aren't worried
about abandonment but they also don't
like proximity to be honest they're
islands they're not that bothered about
being in a relationship and one of the
drivers for that might be that they're
not very comfortable with intimacy but
some people literally just not bothered
can you be shades so could you could you
is you know the avoidant category does
that exist on a spectrum and the yes it
does the reason I mean all attachments
are a spectrum the reason Why we
categorize them is typical scientists we
like a category because when we've got a
category we can do data analysis and we
can decide the sorts of behaviors for
example that these four quarters perform
or we can put somebody in one and help
them change to another for example. Do
you think the way that modern society is
is breeding a certain group of
attachment styles? Do you understand the
question what I'm trying to I do. I
think
we are getting less comfortable with
intimacy
and I think that's partly because we are
not as practiced at it as we used to be
because we are not as we're not forced
to be in close contact with a lot of
people as much as we used to be. You can
pretty much do everything from your
sofa. You can work from your sofa. You
can order food from your sofa. You can
try and maintain your relationships with
your friends from your sofa. You don't
actually have to be in a room with
anyone. after COVID there's a lot of
data showing that people found it people
are much less interested now in meeting
up they kind of got used to being in
that little bubble and even though they
had the yearning of I don't have anyone
with me they become much they became
much more anxious about going out and
actually seeing anybody and it wasn't
just because they were worried about
COVID we got out of the habit and if you
get out of the habit you don't get any
of the chemicals which encourage you to
go out you certainly don't get any of
the addictive chemicals like
betaendorphine so you kind of go a bit
cold turkey Turkey slowly and you just
don't have that draw to go and see
people anymore from a biological point
of view and from a psychological point
of view it becomes a little bit scary.
So you just stay where you are. So I
think we are seeing more avoidant
behaviors in people than we used to. You
talked about the role of dopamine in
getting us to like you know get up and
put our shoes on and get out the house.
And obviously there's lots of things now
at home that are giving us dopamine
whether it's social media or it's
pornography or if it's uh I guess you
know there's other substances that give
us dopamine and I wondered if that's if
you thought that maybe that's playing a
role in I think that is playing a role
because we get that hit and dopamine is
nice. It gives you a reward. The problem
it has is on its own it has no bearing
on social relationships or social
behavior. You need to have the full
cocktail. So that's what I say to people
about social media when they say you
know but I'm getting a dopamine hit.
It's like, yeah, you are, and that's
great, but dopamine is very
shortlasting. On its own, it doesn't
underpin your immune system or your
health in any way. You need the full
lot. You need the full four social
chemicals to get any advantage out of
it. So, that is the problem. And I think
people because we've heard a lot about
dopamine think that that dopamine alone
is going to make you happy and it's not.
You know, earlier we talked about these
people that go on 100 dates and maybe
they don't have the true intention to
actually form a relationship.
Speaking sort of broadly, what what
attachment style do you think those kind
of people fit into? Those people are are
avoidance. So they're either dismissing
avoidant, which means um they don't have
any of the anxiety associated with
relationships, or they're fearful
avoidance. So they they they avoid them
because they're scared of being hurt. So
when people talk about daddy issues or I
guess you could say mommy issues where
the father has
abandoned
that child at an early age.
Do do you think generally those people
have a higher probability of being
fearful avoidant? They certainly have a
higher probability of having an insecure
attachment style because as I mentioned
in the first two years of life when your
brain is growing the environment in
which you're being cared for is going to
shape that brain. Particularly if for
example a parent leaves during that time
or even later on when it's still quite a
sensitive brain that's going to impact
how your brain grows particularly in
that prefrontal cortex. So the bit right
at the front here okay where all your
social cognition is and it's going to
have less gray and white matter in that
area. Uh it's going to have less density
of neurons and less of a high level of
neurochemistry which underpins social
behavior. And because of that, when
you're an adult, you're just not as
equipped to be good at relationships
because your brain, you don't actually
have the brain architecture to underpin
it. So that's one of the reasons why we
see people who grow up in that
environment being more insecure because
they don't have the brain architecture
or indeed the neurochemical the baseline
neurochemical levels circulating in
their body which is going to motivate
and reward them for starting
relationships. So they just don't have
the equipment that people who maybe grew
up in a secure environment do. So that's
one of the problems. And so when people
say daddy issues, partly what they're
talking about is attachment style. It's
the fact that I have this attachment
style and I've identified I have this
attachment style because my father left
whenever I when I was however old. Now
whether that's the entire reason, there
are other reasons why people um behave
the way they do and might not want
relationships. There are genetic
reasons. So there are lots of reasons
why attachment styles can change. Oh,
completely. And the way that they change
is is it accurate to say someone gives
you evidence that counteracts that's one
of the ways and in one sense that's the
easiest way because in a way I didn't
know it was happening. I this happened
long before I studied attachment styles.
I think I was still chasing monkeys at
this point but um
so that's the easiest way is literally
you end up with someone who's secure and
over time they just get into your brain
and they show you you are wrong. Other
ways are being conscious about what your
attachment style is and being conscious
about how it doesn't work for you. There
is no wrong attachment style. That's
what I want to say. If it if you feel
comfortable in your attachment style,
brilliant. That's great. It's when it
doesn't work for you that there's a
problem. And so there I always think
everyone should kind of keep an eye on
what their attachment style is. Um I
think it's quite an important thing to
to to realize if you see yourself, for
example, repeating the same things over
and over again in relationships. So it
gets to a certain point and you le it
for example it's all getting a bit
intense I'm now going to run away or you
always end up pushing people away for
example maybe because you're too
preoccupied or whatever and it's good if
you see that pattern if you are
conscious enough to rec recognize that
pattern then you can do work on yourself
or you can ask your friends to help you
okay if you see me do this you need to
flag it you need to tell me you're doing
it again you need to step beyond that
and it will need support you'll need
emotional support either just from
friends and family or you might need
professional help there are attachment
counselors who will help you or
understand where your attachment style
came from and they will help you do the
work, okay, to shift. So, you can do it
that way. Uh, and then obviously at the
very extreme end of attachment disorders
and they always need input from a
professional. One of the things that I
found to be particularly useful is
vocalizing my attachment style to my
partner and her doing the same back so
that we can both kind of hold understand
the other person even though it might
not be us and we don't understand that
clingy behavior or that avoidant
behavior. vocalizing it in the way that
you've said, not not just becoming
self-aware, but like mutually aware has
really helped us because I can now
understand her behavior. She's she's
much more on the
I don't want to say clingy, but she
needs that sort of reassurance and of my
presence and Yes. And now behavior that
I might have thought in the past was a
bit irrational, I now understand more
contextually. Yeah. And therefore, I'm
able to be more empathetic and more and
that's really important. It's really
important to do that because you know we
all attach in different ways and by
understanding that it helps you as you
say if someone's really clingy it can
feel quite claustrophobic but if you
understand actually that's especially if
you're avoidant it's like triggering
well it's really triggering and that's
what we know we know there are certain
attachment styles that work better
together than others. So we know
particularly a dismissing avoidant
person with a preoccupied person. Yeah.
That's really tricky to keep going. that
is that is a long-term relationship
which is if it can carry on is going to
be very hard work and probably quite uh
roller coastery I would say whereas you
know if any of the of the insecure so
I'm doing this because it's a grid any
of the insecure attachment styles if you
can find yourself somewhere insecure
brilliant secure people are amazing
because they will absorb all that stuff
because they're so secure in themselves
whether you're clingy whether you're
pushing them away they absorb it and
they're good at it preoccupied and
fearful avoidant that works quite well
in one sense because the preoccupied
person wants to stick with the fearful
avoidant person and the thing that's
really really troubling the fearful
avoidant person is you're going to
leave. So if you literally sit on top of
them which is what you're doing if
you're preoccupied then that's great in
one sense because they will think oh
okay they're literally not going
anywhere because they're there all the
time. Um so there are partnerships that
work better and I do I agree with you. I
think it's good to be aware of what each
of within a partnership is because then
you can understand some of the quirks
and behavior. you can understand some of
your reactions to that behavior.
Neurodeiversity.
In the last couple of weeks, I was
thinking, it might be my attachment
style, but it also might be the fact
that I was diagnosed with ADHD, which
I'm not sure if I have, but I was
diagnosed with it. Um, I was thinking
about how a neurodeiverse person might
struggle in love and holding on to
relationships because of their
neurodiversity. Before we started
talking, you said that roughly, I think
25% of the population are classified as
neurodyiverse.
If I have ADHD or autism, how am I
likely or more likely to struggle in
love? Firstly, because the big the
biggie is that the neuroscience and
genetics of love are very like the neuro
the neuroscience and genetics of
neurodeiversity. So the chemistry that
underpins love is also implicated in
neurodeiversity.
Some of the areas of the brain which are
activated in love are also involved in
neurodeiversity. And that is why
particularly with autism but also with
ADHD the issues that that people who are
autistic or ADHD have express themselves
a lot in the social sphere because it's
the same neurochemistry and genetics
essentially. So for example the oxytocin
receptor gene which has 26 point
mutations on it which impact your social
behavior um and and individual
differences in social behavior. A lot of
those are implicated also in autism.
Dopamine uh is implicated obviously in
ADHD. Serotonin is implicated in ADHD.
Those are both chemicals which are
involved in in love, one of the
neurochemicals of love. So there is some
major crossovers between the two. There
are several reasons why neurodiversity
is difficult. For example, um the way
the neurodeiverse brain works, things
like executive function is different in
people with neurodyiverse brains. What
does that mean? Executive function is
things like attention, uh emotional
inhibition, and working memory. It's
kind of the set of skills that allow you
to operate within the world. Um that's
implicate that's impacted in ADHD and in
autism. The processing speeds and also
the way that you process those
particular three elements is different.
For example, people with ADHD, their
working memory generally isn't great.
They find it difficult to recall things
or hold on to things. Uh emotional
regulation is difficult. So, for
example, people with ADHD might build to
anger quicker than people who don't have
it. Um, people with autism tend to have
quite extreme extremes of emotional
experience for example and all of that
is very difficult in a relationship
because if you live with someone who has
extreme emotional reactions or gets very
angry and conflicts very quickly that's
tricky to deal with. We also know things
like sensory processing particularly in
autism is affected. So that has two
implications. First of all, when we're
using all that sensory information in
the attraction stage, so all that
sensory information that's going into
your limbic area, the sensory processing
speeds in people with autism tend to be
slower, but they also tend to be either
hyper sensory, which means they feel all
the senses very intensely, or they tend
to have different experiences sensors,
or they tend to have very low sensory
experience. And all of that will impact,
first of all, how that algorithm
operates in your brain. It will also
impact just simply things like the
environment in which you might go on a
date. So most people want to go on a
date to a restaurant or a pub or a
comedy club or wherever. For autistic
people that's really hard
to deal with. We also know unfortunately
the people who are neurodeiverse are
more likely to be in abusive
relationships
and there are reasons for that. If we
look at ADHD, ADHD is um a dysfunction
in the dopamine system in the brain. So
what happens is you release dopamine but
it's re it's taken back up into the
brain before it has enough of an effect.
So what people with ADHD tend to do is
they dopamine seek. They do activities
which give them a hit of dopamine. Um so
you know I have my daughter I hope she
she should she doesn't mind my
daughter's ADHD autistic. Um her
dopamine seeking is shopping. She
dopamine sinks by shopping because you
get a lovely dopamine hit when you do
it. But unfortunately start of
relationships is a dopamine C. You get
lots of lovely dopamine in start of
relationship. So what you'll tend to
find with ADHD people is they will go
into relationships really quickly
without really considering is this
person right for me. So there's there's
that impulsivity that comes with ADHD as
well because they're getting that hit of
dopamine at the start. We also know that
for example if you are neurodeiverse you
tend to mask a lot. You've got used to
in life masking to fit in with the
neurotypical world. What's masking?
Masking is knowing the rules of the
neurotypical world. So for example,
autistic girls, the reason why autistic
girls tend to be diagnosed later is they
become very good at learning the social
rules. So all those things that they
would naturally want to do in a social
situation, you know, be mute or not
reciprocate properly or, you know, not
say the right thing, they learn what the
rules are. It's why they burn out
generally is because they've spent their
whole childhood studying it and going,
"Okay, so in that circumstance I do this
and in that circumstance I do this." And
they hide the autism. Now, so not only
is that incredibly stressful, but if
you've got used to in life denying who
you are, if you go into a relationship
with someone, particularly if they're
particularly dominant or they're
abusive, you carry on denying who you
are, denying that you have a right, for
example, to be with someone who's kind.
Mhm. Deny, you know, deny the fact that
you have needs. And so, we know that
people who mask find it much much harder
to express what they want in a
relationship. So it is it is really
incredibly tricky I think and you know
we also have issues with empathy for
example there's a myth particularly
autistic people don't empathize that's
not true it's unfortunately still in the
diagnostic criteria and it shouldn't be
the issue is is that um they empathize
in a different way and um so either they
are actually hypermpaths
which means that they feel the other
person's emotions so strongly that they
shut down and so they don't actually
respond to the person because they can't
cope with the extreme emotional overload
they've had. Or the other reason is they
do empathize, but they empathize with a
neurodeiverse brain. And there's been a
recent study looking at this and saying
actually if you put two new
neurodyiverse people together and ask
them to empathize with each other,
they're brilliant. Two neurotypical
people together, ask them brilliant. Ask
a neurodyiverse person and a
neurotypical person to empath they it's
hard because the brain operates in a
different way. So empathy is the basis
of of relationships. So if you um are in
a mixed relationship, neurotypical and
neurodyiverse, that can be tricky
because it can be very hard to empathize
with the other person and know what
their emotional needs are.
On this point then if if we accept that
people with ADHD, I've been diagnosed
with ADHD so everything I say is within
that context. um have higher impulsivity
and they have higher novelty seek
seeking behavior, novelty seeeking
behavior and they have struggles with
emotional
regulation. Yes. And they have some
executive function which is going to
impair their ability to think about sort
of like the stakes and foresight and all
these things.
Does that mean that people with ADHD are
more likely to cheat on you? There's
actually a study which um looked at this
in 2015. It suggested that adults with
ADHD were more likely to report
infidelity than nonADHD peers.
However, the effect size was not
overwhelming. Yes, I I'm always wary of
studies like that because first of all,
if the effect size is not overwhelming,
I think we have to be very careful of
labeling neurodyiverse people as the
problem in a relationship. Um, and I'm
very aware of that. I do a lot of
training on this particularly for
therapists. And I think we need to be
aware that all relationships are a
interaction between two people and they
will each bring their issues. And I
think the labeling of people with
neurodiversity as the problem is is not
on. We all whether we're neurodyiverse
or not have to learn to adapt to the
other person. And we have to educate
ourselves about how their brain works,
attachment, whatever it might be. And
therefore, I need think we need to be
careful. I think with ADHD, what we do
know is people with ADHD are more likely
to have many more short-term
relationships because they get bored
quite easily. They are also much more
likely to undertake risky sexual
behavior, cheating maybe um because they
are that because of the impulsivity. So
it might be I would want to see that
study replicated many times before I
think we say that's a that's a
fundamental issue. And I would also
question you know if it's got a very
small effect size there's many other
reasons why people cheat. So, do you
know I think in part the reason why I
asked that question is because again one
of my very good friends um has struggled
in this regard for many many years. He's
approaching his 40s now and he's what
what what part of the relationship is
well it's not necessarily what he
struggled with. It's what he loves. He
loves as he says to me the chase. Yes.
He says I love the chase. Yes. And when
you when you really just love the chase
and you maybe don't love the part after
it as much you're not going to have a
great relationship. and he got to I
think about 35 36 years old and he was
diagnosed with ADHD and it put the rest
of his life in context and it was I mean
of all the people that I know that have
ADHD most certainly he fits the the sort
of criteria and um he looked back
through his old report cards and he look
mapped the behavior that he had had in
relationships. It was very impulsive. It
was very very short term. He loves he
goes on more dates than anyone I've ever
met in my entire life because he loves
the as he says the chase. And I I
thought, you know, maybe there is a link
there with his neurodiversity.
Obviously, I would say there probably
is. I mean, he's dopamine seeking. Yeah.
Essentially, that's what he's doing
because the early stages, you know, when
you get lot um when you get further into
a relationship, dopamine takes more of a
back seat. Um and come in. So, betray is
the chemical of long-term love. Dopamine
is much more in the background at that
point. So, we get the major part of our
dopamine hits in relationships at the
start. And that's probably why he gets
to a point where the dopamine starts
tailing off. The oxytocin starts to tail
off and beta endorphine starts kicking
in and it becomes less exciting. That's
when we move from passionate love to
companionate love and it's just not as
exhilarating maybe. So if you have a
brain like that that's highly dopamine
seeking. You're going to theoretically
struggle to have long-term
relationships. And we know that. We know
that. I I recently um did a conference
which was on women in ADHD and we had a
workshop and most of the women in that
room said I either don't have
relationships or I struggle or I'm in a
long-term relationship but it is a daily
struggle to maintain it because it's so
hard to keep your attention on that
relationship to not look for the novelty
elsewhere and also for the other person
particularly if they're neurotypical to
deal with. I mean, one woman said to me,
"I'm always told I'm too much. I'm too
much to go out with because of the
impulsivity and the rushing around and
the lack of attention and the lack of
calmness and the need for spontaneity, I
guess." Yeah. What can one do about it?
I I don't like pushing drugs on anybody.
And I think whether you take um
medication for ADHD is a very personal
decision. But I think if I the mantra I
have is if your ADHD is fundamentally
upsetting your life and you feel that
then it's something you maybe need to
consider. It's very difficult to do just
off your own back. It's not a therapy
issue. It's not you know an attachment
issue. It's very likely to be a
neurochemical issue. And that's the
different thing. I would also say it's
also about the people who you go out
with. I've spoken to lots of couples
which are mixed in terms of
neurodiversity and neurotypical and it's
about the person who's neurotypical
really educating themselves about how
the neurodyiverse brain works. So they
have an understanding also about why is
that person reacting like that? Why are
they doing that? And that's also really
really important. I don't think we want
to put the burden always on
neurodyiverse people to change because I
don't think that's really an acceptable
thing to ask them to do. I don't think
it's really any different from any
relationship. The best relationships are
ones where we take the time to really
understand who our partner is. That's
the way it works best. So you saying you
and your partner talk about your
attachment styles. That's really
important. You're fundamentally
making it clear that that's important to
you and that your partner has an
understanding and you're explaining your
behavior. And I think that's important.
I wonder how this dubtales into the
subject of sex and novelty and
spontaneity as it relates to sex. If
you're a neurody divergent person or you
just have a higher, you know, impulse
desire, I guess, or impulsivity, need
for novelty,
you probably get bored of sex pretty
quick, possibly. Yeah. I mean, it's not
an area I study particularly, but I
think yes, you probably do. And and we
know that humans, some humans are
genetically neurode divergent or not,
some humans are genetically predisposed
to like novelty more than others. It's
part of the of one of the dopamine
genes. And so some people yes they are
more likely to seek out novelty and want
for example yes a very varied sex life.
Um but you know that's something you can
have with one individual. You don't
necessarily have to go out and you know
if that individual is willing to to go
down that route with you. It's not
something you necessarily have to seek
elsewhere. As it relates to all the work
that you do and the future work that
you're going to go on to do. What is the
most important thing we haven't talked
about that maybe we should have talked
about? Um two things. I really really
want to emphasize the body of work which
says that your relationships are the
biggest factor in your health, your
longevity and your well-being. And the
reason why I want to emphasize that is
because in a world of digital
communication we have become much less
good at nurturing our relationships much
less good at impact inputting into our
relationships maintaining our
relationships in the way they should be
maintained which is in person. And that
has consequences for our health. you
know a wonderful study the first study
of its kind in 2010 there have been many
since by Julie Halt Lunstead she but she
did a massive meta analysis which is
lots and lots of studies coming together
looking at the impact of your social
network your relationships all those
sorts of things on outcomes health
outcomes things like the likelihood that
you would have poor mental health the
likelihood that you would suffer from
certain chronic diseases the likelihood
that you would recover from certain
illnesses or how long it would take you
to come back round after having an
operation in terms of getting better and
she found and it's been even more
impressive since then that that your
relationships are the biggest factor in
your health, well-being and longevity
above all else from don't smoke,
maintain a good weight, do your
exercise, eat your vegetables, all those
sorts of things. Above all of that sit
your relationships. So when we in this
very healthconscious world where we have
lots of health influences and all that
kind of thing,
we're still missing that point and we're
still trying to do our relationships
efficiently in this busy busy world. And
I understand why. And the tools we've
been given to do it are attractive. You
know, they're attractive. We love a new
shiny thing, humans, and they're they're
great. But what's happened is we've
we've forgotten who we are and how we
need to do it. And our brains did not
evolve with the shiny screen. Our brains
evolved in a world where we all lived
very very close together. And we need to
kind of in a way go back to that if you
want to f have that fulfilling life. So
I think that's my first point. I think
the second one is the role for AI. Uh,
and you've probably talked about AI in
so many different contexts, but AI in
our intimate relationships, and I don't
mean just sexually intimate, I mean
emotionally intimate. So, any
relationship you have based on love is
something we need to talk about because
there is work towards, for example, we
know about AI chatbots already. Uh, and
we know that there's going to be work
towards having AI caretakers, for
example, people who care for people,
robots who care for people, or even, you
know, you could even possibly have a
relationship. I'm not talking about sex
bots, but I'm talking about a full
relationship with a robot. Again, all of
these things, we need to understand the
implications and we need to have a
conversation now because when you
unleash these things, if you haven't had
that conversation, it's very hard to put
them back in the box. And we know
already things like chat bots are out
there and I'm not the sort to say
something is entirely negative. So, chat
bots have their place. They've been
shown to be really, really good for
particularly with people who have social
anxiety or people who are, for example,
autistic and want to practice being
social. They're really good. You're not
going to get any criticism from the
chatbot. You're not going to get a funny
face pulled or make them feel
uncomfortable. It's great. You can have
a good old and that's brilliant. It's
when you replace real human contact.
Absolutely. It's
it makes the conversation feel a lot
more comfortable and natural. Um, and
you can really focus on the chat itself,
distractions. It uh it definitely helps
keep the vibe positive. Isn't it crazy
how much that's progressed? Yeah, it is.
But what scares me about it is that
person talking to you there. Your brain
at the moment because we haven't
advanced enough in AI and maybe well
knows that's not human. And because it
knows it's not human, it's not releasing
any of the positive chemicals that come
with social interaction in your brain.
And it's those chemicals that underpin
your health, your mental health and your
physical health. Be sure often underpins
your immune system. So that's the
problem. Your prefrontal cortex at the
moment is not recognizing that as human.
So it's not going to kick off anything.
And that is the problem. Now maybe a
robot, you know, an AI guy would say to
me, "Oh, we'll get there." Okay, if you
can get there, great. But at the moment,
we're not. And we have people who are
starting to build really strong
attachments to these things. You can
build an attachment to a chatbot. It's a
parasocial relationship. Same as
building a relationship to a celebrity
you've never met, but you're not getting
any of the positive benefits. So have
them in their life. Have them as part of
your social network. if you want to
spend time, but do not replace humans
with them or even dogs with them. Um,
care robots scare me because um again
it's about replacing humans in a context
which is very very complicated from a
neuroscientific point of view. Care
requires empathy. It requires um a thing
called which occurs in very close human
relationships again underpins our um
immune system and our health known as
biobehavioral synchrony. So bio
behavioral synchrony, we won't have it
now. I'm really sorry. We're not close
enough. But you will have it with your
partner. So when you're with your
partner, if I were to observe you, your
body language and maybe the gestures you
use and the and your vocal tone and
maybe the language you use would start
kind of matching each other. We all know
this from management training. You know,
you match people to make them feel
closer to you. Fine. It's what humans
do. It makes us feel close to each
other. But if we were to look into your
body, you and your partner would have
entered that room at different baseline
levels of physiological measures such as
your blood pressure, your heart rate,
your body temperature. Okay? If you sat
together and had a chat for five
minutes, those would all come into
synchrony. So your heart rates would
synchronize, your body temperature and
your blood pressure. And then if we were
to look into your brain, two things
would have happened. First of all,
having come into the room again with
different activation patterns in your
brain, we would look in your brain and
your activation patterns would be the
same. So you would be perceiving the
world in the same way. And finally, if
we looked at your neurochemical levels,
so we generally look at oxytocin because
it's easiest to access. Again, we all
have baseline levels of oxytocin.
They're different from each other. You
would have walked in with different
levels. After 5 minutes, they would have
synchronized. They would be the same. So
what actually happens when you're with
someone you're close to to develop that
bond is you become one organism.
You are literally operating as one
being. And we think that's that in a way
is the absolute fundamental basis of
human close love and it's the fundament
and you don't get that at the moment
with an AI robot. And I can't imagine it
being easy because you need a wet brain
and you need a circulatory system. This
um this picture I have here which talks
about the brain and love. What is that
showing? That's showing that we can I'll
throw it up on the screen but yes it's
showing that we can't get the same depth
of love as it relates to neuroscience
that then we can from a human versus
like a pet. Yes. So what's happening
here? So we've got the different sorts
of love. So we've got romantic love and
parental love. Now these two arguably
are the most intense forms of love.
Okay? Uh that's why you see such
amazingly complex areas of the brain
lighting up. You've got a lot happening
in the core of the brain here. This is
the lyic system. And you've got
happening neoccortically as well in
relation to areas related to um social
behavior but also things like
empathizing, okay, and maintenance and
trust and all those sorts of things.
Love for a friend is from a
neuroscientific point of view nearly as
complicated as romantic love. But what
it doesn't actually have which is really
interesting is in romantic love the
difference is we actually get some
activations which mirror the activations
you get if you're on an opiate. Mhm.
That sort of addictive euphoric um
sensation. You get that you get that
pattern in romantic love. You don't get
it in friendship love. You also don't
generally get biobehavioral synchrony in
friendship unless it's a really close
friend. So friendship love is just less
intense. It's a love but it's not as
intense. I wouldn't describe this as
love for a stranger. What you can see
the reason why I say that is can you see
how little unconscious activation there
is? This is the limbic area. Well that's
the same with the pet. So so we get
we're not getting any unconscious
nurturing attachment behaviors which you
wouldn't expect to get with a stranger.
with a pet. I'm surprised to look at
this and I don't know where this came
from because other studies have shown
that pet love is very like parental
love. Oh, really? Yeah. So, I don't know
which study this is and I don't know
what they looked at or how many people
they looked at. So, that's interesting.
But what I would expect to see more more
actually here in the nurturing area
because we do know that um you can build
an attachment relationship with a pet.
So, it's very surprising that there's
nothing there.
The research you have there looked at
the differences between friends, loves,
pet strangers. Um, it's from Renee Atel
cerebral cortex, a 2024 study. Okay.
Okay. That's interesting. I mean, with
science, you sometimes get different
answers because you've done different
methodology or you've got different
populations. We tend to like to see
things replicated for them to be
converted. So, I'm a bit surprised by
this. Also, in my book, I talk about
some really good studies that have been
done looking at dog human love. So I'm
surprised by that. I'm not surprised
that it's got quite a a bit of cortical
action. I'm really surprised it has
nothing in the limbic area because
that's where attachment is. And love for
nature. Um again this is really
interesting because again this is this
is the striatum and the amydala and this
is where human love like to another
sentient being would be. And again we've
got nothing. So love for nature is a
much more it's not a conscious thing
but it's a much less emotional thing.
It's it's different. And and we only
really see patterns like this if you're
interacting with another sentient being.
And this is what kind of worries me
about AI because if you did this with
AI, you would probably get something
like this. If you really loved your AI
robot at the moment or your chatbot, you
would get this. But you I would be very
surprised if you got anything in the
limbic area. And and and the studies so
far show that we don't because you you
don't develop that loving relationship
and you certainly don't get anything in
the prefrontal cortex. And that's the
problem. Now AI might go on in leaps and
bounds, but I at the moment when they
talk about programming empathy, empathy
is so complicated and particularly the
empathy we have, we have cognitive
empathy. Most animals have emotional
empathy. So cognitive empathy is much
more complex. It's very hard to do and
the fact you can't get biobehavioral
synchrony unless you have a wet system.
And robots so far don't have wet
systems. So that's what worries me. But
it's going to come and we have to have
that conversation.
We have a closing tradition where the
last guest leaves the question for the
next guest knowing not knowing who
they're leaving it for. Okay. And the
question that's been left for you, was
there a moment in your career when you
said to yourself, I have made it.
Um I think I'm not good at doing that
actually. I said to my husband the other
day, I'm not good at celebrating when I
do something. So I tend to go, what's
next?
um very human. I suppose one of the
times I thought I probably had made it
was when I started at the University of
Oxford and I was working with Robin
Dumbar and then I thought from an
academic point of view this is like the
pinnacle of where you can work with a
team of people who are at the forefront
of what they're doing. So I think that
was probably a moment but I'm really
good in retrospect at kind of rewriting
that and going yeah but that wasn't good
enough so let's go and do the next
thing. So so if we look forward then sat
here now
What do you think the moment will be in
your future where you think you've made
it? Although you probably when you
arrive there, you'll think, you know,
there's another goal.
I think
it's partly to do with the spreading of
education. I think if my next book
reaches a lot of people and reaches
enough people, I will think I've made it
and I've done my mission to share what
we know about dads because there's so
much written and it stays in fusty old
journals and nobody reads it. And I want
to share that because it fundamentally
changes
how who dads think they are and how they
do it. I get so many emails from people
saying, you know, wow, I've read your
book and it like legitimizes so much for
me. It makes me understand what I'm
going through or it makes me realize
that I am needed. And I think if I can
get a book that has a really diverse
readership, then that will be the moment
where I think yes, I've done what I want
to do. And what is the um unheard plight
of dads? Because you'll be on the
receiving end of so many messages and
emails and stuff. What if you could
summarize how dads are feeling at the
moment and why your work is resonating?
How would you summarize if if you were
speaking as a dad, a dad who represents
the average of the dads that contact
you? What would those sentences be? It
would be, I'm made to feel unimportant.
I am made to feel like a secondary
parent, like a bag carrier or the person
who makes the tea. That's particularly
in relation to like birth and antiatal
stuff. So, it's all about them not
feeling like they are important or that
they're needed. and they are so wrong.
Is the law slightly biased towards Do
you know how why I asked that question?
I was in a cab the other day and I got
in this taxi in uh in London and the cab
driver um spent about 30 minutes telling
me that he'd been at a march in London
for dads and that he had had his child
taken off him, I believe. Mhm. and he
was proceeded to tell me for the next
sort of 20 minutes that the laws are
unfair as it relates to dad's right to
to see and take care of their kids.
Yeah, you probably know the laws better
than I do, but it is and we I've spent a
long time and I'm still not there yet
wanting to go into the family courts in
Britain and inform them about this
because at the moment they're operating
on out modded um understandings that the
primary person a child needs is their
mom and therefore if there's any
possible reason why dad they don't think
dad is appropriate, whatever it might
be, it might be that dad's living too
far away or dad's job doesn't allow for
it. They will not stick to the
presumption of 50/50 custody and they
will swing it all over in terms in in
favor of mom, for example. And that is
because they do not fundamentally
understand how important that father is
to that child. And that's because
they've not kept up. They're literally
they're operating on very outmoded
completely culturally based, not
evidencebased at all assumptions about
who a father is. So he's right. He's
absolutely right. And there are many men
who are in that position. I get emailed
all the time from men doing and all the
time from people saying, you know, well,
you come and be my expert witness, et
and I can't I can't do it. I I don't
have time to do it. But yeah, there's a
fundamental misunderstanding of how
important fathers are, but that's just
reflecting a wider cultural problem.
Thank you. Thank you so much for doing
the work you're doing because you're
certainly opening millions and millions
of people's eyes. You've opened my eyes
in a a bunch of profound ways, both on
the subject of love, but also on the
importance of fatherhood. And it is very
easy to to believe the sort of broader
social narrative that as a father you
are surplus to requirements or you're
some I don't know you're there to to pay
for things or you're um less important
in some way. But you know I've got a
brother who's a year older than me and
he's got three kids under the age of six
and um he's really managed to design his
life around being there for those kids.
And I've seen both the impact that
that's had on those kids and their
development but also the impact it's had
on him and the meaning he has in his
life. and he's one of those fathers that
um walked away from the corporate world
and made a decision to prioritize the
three little children that he's brought
into this world. And it's really like
kind of blew open my own I guess
stereotypes and presumptions that I had
about the role that I have when I become
a dad. And now much of the reason I have
these conversations and enjoy your work
so much is because it's a further
reminder that um the narrative I've
believed around fathers being this you
know kind of distant uh being that
floats in and out in provides you blow
it open and you blow it open from a
anthropological perspective and
evolutionary perspective and a
neuroscience and biological perspective
which I think is really critical and I
think because of that there's going to
be so many kids that have better
development outcomes and so please do
keep doing the work you're doing and I'm
very excited for your upcoming book.
Thank you so much. Thank you for being
here. Really appreciate you. Thank you.
Thank you.
[Music]